<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><title>Guidelines for the Repertorium Initiative XML model for manuscript description</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="http://www.obdurodon.org/css/style.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="guidelines.css"/></head><body><nav><ul><li><a href="#mIntro1.">Intro 1. Preface to the second edition</a></li><li><a href="#mIntro2.">Intro 2. Preface to the first edition</a></li><li><a href="#mIntro2.1.">Intro 2.1. Introduction</a></li><li><a href="#mIntro2.2.">Intro 2.2. About this document</a></li><li><a href="#mIntro2.3.">Intro 2.3. Acknowledgements</a></li><li><a href="#mIntro3.">Intro 3. Abbreviations and acronyms</a></li><li><a href="#mIntro3.1.">Intro 3.1. Abbreviations and acronyms in the text</a></li></ul><ul><li><a href="#m1.">1. Introduction to the model</a></li><li><a href="#m1.1.">1.1. Short history</a></li><li><a href="#m1.2.">1.2. Sources for the XML model</a></li><li><a href="#m1.3.">1.3. The Text Encoding Initiative Consortium and the Repertorium</a></li><li><a href="#m2.">2. Standards and recommendations implied in TEI P5</a></li><li><a href="#m2.1.">2.1. Visualization and publication</a></li><li><a href="#m2.2.">2.2. Public identifier and XML namespaces</a></li><li><a href="#m2.3.">2.3. The modules</a></li><li><a href="#m2.4.">2.4. Some principles</a></li><li><a href="#m3.">3. The main structure</a></li><li><a href="#m3.1.">3.1. Levels of representation</a></li><li><a href="#m3.1.1.">3.1.1. Description with the msIdentifier and head elements</a></li><li><a href="#m3.1.2.">3.1.2. Description with msIdentifier and paragraphs</a></li><li><a href="#m3.1.3.">3.1.3. Extraction of information from a full description</a></li><li><a href="#m4.">4. Cataloguing information</a></li><li><a href="#m4.1.">4.1. General remarks</a></li><li><a href="#m4.2.">4.2. The manuscript name</a></li><li><a href="#m4.3.">4.3. A paragraph between the name of the manuscript and its location</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.">4.4. Location of the manuscript</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.1.">4.4.1. General remarks</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.2.">4.4.2. Country</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.3.">4.4.3. Settlement (city or town, etc.)</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.4.">4.4.4. Region</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.5.">4.4.5. Place and geographical names</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.6.">4.4.6. Repository (library, archive, etc.)</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.7.">4.4.7. Name of the institution</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.8.">4.4.8. Shelfmarks, inventory and catalogue designations</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.9.">4.4.9. Current and former shelfmarks, catalogue numbers, and inventory
                     numbers</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.10.">4.4.10. Collections</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.11.">4.4.11. Various parts of the manuscript in one repository</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.12.">4.4.12. One and the same manuscript in different repositories</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.13.">4.4.13. Summary informaation about the altIdentifier and idno
                     elements</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.14.">4.4.14. Secundo folio</a></li><li><a href="#m4.4.15.">4.4.15. Additional information in the catalogue description</a></li><li><a href="#m5.">5. Codicological information</a></li><li><a href="#m5.1.">5.1. General remarks</a></li><li><a href="#m5.2.">5.2. Description of material and layout</a></li><li><a href="#m5.3.">5.3. Description of physical support</a></li><li><a href="#m5.4.">5.4. Detailed description of material</a></li><li><a href="#m5.5.">5.5. Description of parchment</a></li><li><a href="#m5.6.">5.6. Description of paper</a></li><li><a href="#m5.6.1.">5.6.1. General remarks</a></li><li><a href="#m5.6.2.">5.6.2. Watermarks</a></li><li><a href="#m5.6.2.1.">5.6.2.1. Motif</a></li><li><a href="#m5.6.2.2.">5.6.2.2. Countermark</a></li><li><a href="#m5.7.">5.7. A note inside material</a></li><li><a href="#m5.8.">5.8. Number of leaves or folia</a></li><li><a href="#m5.9.">5.9. Dimensions</a></li><li><a href="#m5.9.1.">5.9.1. General remarks</a></li><li><a href="#m5.9.2.">5.9.2. Height</a></li><li><a href="#m5.9.3.">5.9.3. Width</a></li><li><a href="#m5.9.4.">5.9.4. Depth</a></li><li><a href="#m5.9.5.">5.9.5. Example</a></li><li><a href="#m5.9.6.">5.9.6. Other dimensions</a></li><li><a href="#m5.10.">5.10. Foliation and pagination</a></li><li><a href="#m5.11.">5.11. Collation</a></li><li><a href="#m5.11.1.">5.11.1. Signatures</a></li><li><a href="#m5.11.2.">5.11.2. Description of each quire</a></li><li><a href="#m5.11.3.">5.11.3. Gregory rule or the rule of parchment arrangement in the quire</a></li><li><a href="#m5.11.4.">5.11.4. Ruling patterns and types</a></li><li><a href="#m5.11.5.">5.11.5. Prickings</a></li><li><a href="#m5.12.">5.12. The manuscript condition</a></li><li><a href="#m5.13.">5.13. Description of the page layout</a></li><li><a href="#m5.14.">5.14. Ink</a></li><li><a href="#m5.15.">5.15. Decoration</a></li><li><a href="#m5.16.">5.16. Binding</a></li><li><a href="#m5.16.1.">5.16.1. General remarks</a></li><li><a href="#m5.16.2.">5.16.2. Date of binding and place where it is made</a></li><li><a href="#m5.17.">5.17. Description of seals</a></li><li><a href="#m5.18.">5.18. Description and edition of various notes</a></li><li><a href="#m5.18.1.">5.18.1. General remarks</a></li><li><a href="#m5.18.2.">5.18.2. Description and edition of a later note as part of the additions
                     element</a></li><li><a href="#m5.18.3.">5.18.3. Additional notes and texts on separate manuscript folia</a></li><li><a href="#m6.">6. The scribe: palaeography and features of the language</a></li><li><a href="#m6.1.">6.1. General remarks</a></li><li><a href="#m6.2.">6.2. Palaeographical features</a></li><li><a href="#m6.2.1.">6.2.1. The description of the shape of each sign (palaeoNote)</a></li><li><a href="#m6.2.2.">6.2.2. Musical notation</a></li><li><a href="#m6.2.3.">6.2.3. Cryptography</a></li><li><a href="#m6.3.">6.3. Description of the scribe’s language</a></li><li><a href="#m6.3.1.">6.3.1. General remarks</a></li><li><a href="#m6.3.2.">6.3.2. Orthography</a></li><li><a href="#m6.3.2.1.">6.3.2.1. The element orthNote</a></li><li><a href="#m6.3.2.1.1.">6.3.2.1.1. The orthography of the jers</a></li><li><a href="#m6.3.2.1.2.">6.3.2.1.2. The orthography of the juses</a></li><li><a href="#m6.3.2.1.3.">6.3.2.1.3. The orthography of the letters for jotated vowels</a></li><li><a href="#m6.3.2.1.4.">6.3.2.1.4. The orthography of other letters or signs</a></li><li><a href="#m6.3.3.">6.3.3. Description of grammar</a></li><li><a href="#m6.3.4.">6.3.4. Description of lexical features</a></li><li><a href="#m7.">7. The manuscript contents</a></li><li><a href="#m7.1.">7.1. The content of the whole manuscript</a></li><li><a href="#m7.2.">7.2. Several levels of the representation of whole manuscript contents</a></li><li><a href="#m7.2.1.">7.2.1. Unstructured view</a></li><li><a href="#m7.2.2.">7.2.2. Structured view</a></li><li><a href="#m7.3.">7.3. A summary of the texts</a></li><li><a href="#m7.4.">7.4. The manuscript title page</a></li><li><a href="#m7.5.">7.5. The authors, editors and compilers of the text collection in the
                  manuscript</a></li><li><a href="#m7.6.">7.6. A note in the description of texts</a></li><li><a href="#m7.7.">7.7. Information about text history for the whole manuscript</a></li><li><a href="#m7.8.">7.8. The original text on the level of the whole manuscript</a></li><li><a href="#m7.9.">7.9. The characterization of each text</a></li><li><a href="#m7.10.">7.10. The text location</a></li><li><a href="#m7.11.">7.11. The name of the text given by the researcher</a></li><li><a href="#m7.12.">7.12. The author of the text</a></li><li><a href="#m7.13.">7.13. Special data related to the text</a></li><li><a href="#m7.14.">7.14. Dates for texts sung or read on particular occasions</a></li><li><a href="#m7.15.">7.15. The language of the text</a></li><li><a href="#m7.16.">7.16. The text source</a></li><li><a href="#m7.17.">7.17. The text translation</a></li><li><a href="#m7.18.">7.18. Special parts for textual criticism</a></li><li><a href="#m7.19.">7.19. The text location and textual criticism</a></li><li><a href="#m7.20.">7.20. Decorations for a particular text</a></li><li><a href="#m7.21.">7.21. Description and edition of the colophon</a></li><li><a href="#m7.22.">7.22. The original text from the manuscript</a></li><li><a href="#m7.22.1.">7.22.1. Headings, incipita and explicita as part of text descriptions</a></li><li><a href="#m7.22.2.">7.22.2. Samples from the original text of the manuscript</a></li><li><a href="#m7.22.3.">7.22.3. Edition of rare or unedited texts</a></li><li><a href="#m7.22.4.">7.22.4. Original texts in other parts of the electronic description</a></li><li><a href="#m7.23.">7.23. Bibliographic references in msItemStruct</a></li><li><a href="#m7.24.">7.24. Description of texts with complicated structure</a></li><li><a href="#m8.">8. The history of the manuscript</a></li><li><a href="#m8.1.">8.1. General remarks</a></li><li><a href="#m8.2.">8.2. Date and place of origin of the manuscript</a></li><li><a href="#m8.3.">8.3. Notes and additional materials about the history of the manuscript’s possession
                  and acquisition</a></li><li><a href="#m8.4.">8.4. Provenance</a></li><li><a href="#m8.5.">8.5. Acquisition</a></li><li><a href="#m9.">9. Additional information in the description</a></li><li><a href="#m9.1.">9.1. Administrative information</a></li><li><a href="#m9.1.1.">9.1.1. Recording the history of the electronic description</a></li><li><a href="#m9.1.2.">9.1.2. Availability of the manuscript</a></li><li><a href="#m9.1.3.">9.1.3. Custodial facts</a></li><li><a href="#m9.1.4.">9.1.4. The note in the administrative information</a></li><li><a href="#m9.1.5.">9.1.5. Copies of the manuscript</a></li><li><a href="#m9.1.6.">9.1.6. A bibliographical list</a></li><li><a href="#m10.">10. Encoding parts of the manuscript</a></li><li><a href="#m10.1.">10.1. Description of palimpsests</a></li><li><a href="#m10.2.">10.2. Description of convolutes</a></li><li><a href="#m10.3.">10.3. Description of additional folia or parts of the manuscripts</a></li><li><a href="#m10.4.">10.4. Additionally written part(s) of a manuscript</a></li><li><a href="#m10.5.">10.5. A complicated example: a palimpsest kept in various repositories</a></li><li><a href="#m11.">11. Recommended minimum metadata content in manuscript description files for the
               Repertorium</a></li><li><a href="#m11.1.">11.1. The title and creators of the documents</a></li><li><a href="#m11.2.">11.2. Information on document publication</a></li><li><a href="#m11.3.">11.3. The source of the document</a></li><li><a href="#m11.4.">11.4. Non-bibliographic aspects of the document</a></li><li><a href="#m11.5.">11.5. Descriptions of possible document changes</a></li><li><a href="#m12.">12. Usage of some elements common with TEI P5 declarations</a></li><li><a href="#m12.1.">12.1. Divisions</a></li><li><a href="#m12.2.">12.2. Paragraphs</a></li><li><a href="#m12.3.">12.3. Bibliographies and references</a></li><li><a href="#m13.">13. Conclusion</a></li><li><a href="#m14.">14. References</a></li></ul><ul><li><a href="#mAppendixA.">Appendix A. Renamed Repertorium 2.1 Elements and their TEI P5 and Repertorium 3.0
               correspondences</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixB.">Appendix B. Renamed Repertorium elements without TEI P5 correspondence</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixC.">Appendix C. Unique Repertorium elements</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixD.">Appendix D. Obsolete Repertorium elements</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixE.">Appendix E. TEI modules used in the Repertorium and their changes</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixF.">Appendix F. Deleted TEI models</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.">Appendix G. Changed TEI element declarations</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.1.">Appendix G.1. Element additions</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.2.">Appendix G.2. Element altIdentifier</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.3.">Appendix G.3. Element binding</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.4.">Appendix G.4. Element collation</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.5.">Appendix G.5. Element history</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.6.">Appendix G.6. Element layout</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.7.">Appendix G.7. Element material</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.8.">Appendix G.8. Element msContents</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.9.">Appendix G.9. Element msDesc</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.10.">Appendix G.10. Element msIdentifier</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.11.">Appendix G.11. Element msItemStruct</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.12.">Appendix G.12. Element msPart</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.13.">Appendix G.13. Element musicNotation</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.14.">Appendix G.14. Element physDesc</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.15.">Appendix G.15. Element supportDesc</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixG.16.">Appendix G.16. Element watermark</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.">Appendix H. New elements</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.1.">Appendix H.1. Element bindingNote</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.2.">Appendix H.2. Element countermark</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.3.">Appendix H.3. Element crypto</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.4.">Appendix H.4. Element grammar</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.5.">Appendix H.5. Element gregoryRule</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.6.">Appendix H.6. Element ink</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.7.">Appendix H.7. Element lexis</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.8.">Appendix H.8. Element motif</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.9.">Appendix H.9. Element orthNote</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.10.">Appendix H.10. Element pagination</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.11.">Appendix H.11. Element palaeoCharact</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.12.">Appendix H.12. Element palaeoNote</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.13.">Appendix H.13. Element pricking</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.14.">Appendix H.14. Element ruling</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.15.">Appendix H.15. Element quire</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.16.">Appendix H.16. Element ruling</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.17.">Appendix H.17. Element sampleText</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.18.">Appendix H.18. Element scribe</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.19.">Appendix H.19. Element scribeDesc</a></li><li><a href="#mAppendixH.20.">Appendix H.20. Element scribeLang</a></li></ul></nav><main>
      
         <h1>
               Guidelines for the Repertorium Initiative XML Model for manuscript
                  description
            </h1><p>By Andrej Bojadžiev, David J. Birnbaum, Anisava Miltenova, and Dilyana Radoslavova.</p><p>Second edition. Sofia - Pittsburgh: Repertorium Initiative (Institute of Literature, Bulgarian Academy of
                  Sciences, Sofia University, and University of Pittsburgh), 2019.</p>
               <p class="note">The intellectual content of this file is copyrighted by its creators under a <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/">Creative Commons
                     Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-SA 4.0)</a> License. The
                  attribution requirement should be implemented by linking to the URL <a href="http://repertorium.obdurodon.org">http://repertorium.obdurodon.org</a>.</p>
            <hr/>
         <div>
            <h2 id="mIntro1.">Intro 1. Preface to the second edition</h2>
            <div class="p">… blah blah</div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="mIntro2.">Intro 2. Preface to the first edition</h2>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mIntro2.1.">Intro 2.1. Introduction</h3>
               <div class="p">These Guidelines are the first complete introduction to the Repertorium Initiative
                  XML model for the electronic description of medieval manuscripts. The model is
                  part of the activity of the <i>Special Commission for Computer Processing of
                     Medieval Slavonic Manuscripts and Early Printed Books</i> to the
                  Executive Board of the International Committee of Slavists. This version of the
                  Guidelines differs significantly from all previous versions in both form and
                  content. The most important new feature is the synchronization with the “P5:
                  Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange” of the Text Encoding
                  Initiative Consortium (TEI) XML. We have retained differences between the TEI and
                  the Repertorium manuscript description models in situations where it was necessary
                  to extend the TEI resources, but we have made every effort to bring two as close
                  as possible, taking into consideration primarily the three principal medieval
                  manuscript traditions in Europe: Slavic, Greek, and Latin. We hope that the result
                  will contribute to further discussion of how to encode a manuscript description in
                  electronic form. An Appendix to this text explains and discusses remaining
                  differences between the TEI and Repertorium schemas and guidelines.</div>
               <div class="p">This edition has been rewritten completely, and is not based directly on earlier
                  attempts to document the Repertorium XML model. It contains many editorial
                  changes, new examples, revised lists of elements and attributes, and discussions
                  about a wide variety of topics.</div>
               <div class="p">Previous versions of these Guidelines circulated only in electronic form. The
                  first was compiled for the Annual TEI Members’ Meeting in 2005 in Sofia.
                  Subsequently, within the framework of the project <i>Slovo: Toward a Digital
                     Library of South Slavic Manuscripts</i> (2007–08, cf. Miklas and
                  Miltenova 2008), funded by the Austrian Science and Liaison Offices, a new
                  electronic version was prepared. Both are now archived and available on request.
                  The present, new Guidelines are based on the ideas and proposals contained in
                  various project papers, proceedings and special volumes (Birnbaum and Miltenova
                  2000, esp. Miltenova and Bojadžiev 2000, Bojadžiev 2000, Dobreva 2000, Stojkova
                  2000, Radoslavova 2000; Miltenova et al. 2003, esp. Cleminson 2003, Bojadžiev et
                  al. 2003, Moussakova 2003, Krushelnitskaya 2003; Miklas and Miltenova 2008, cf.
                  Birnbaum et. al. 1995; Cleminson 1998; Gagova 1998, 2000; Radoslavova 1998;
                  Stoykova 1998), as well as in the Commission’s journal
                  <cite>Scripta &amp; e-Scripta</cite> (e.g., Miltenova 2008; Boyadzhiev
                  2009). These ideas have also been presented and discussed at several conferences
                  and workshops. It goes without saying that this published document can reflect
                  only the current level of our work and the model may undergo further changes, but
                  we consider the present version representative of a stable stage in the
                  development of the Repertorium schema that has been used effectively in
                  production.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mIntro2.2.">Intro 2.2. About this document</h3>
               <div class="p">This document is provided as an introduction to the XML model for the description
                  of Medieval Manuscripts known as the Repertorium Initiative or Template for Slavic
                  Manuscripts (TSM). It is intended for those who have some previous knowledge of
                  XML technologies and who would like to begin to describe medieval manuscripts. It
                  should not be considered a general introduction to markup technologies, nor a
                  tutorial on the TEI approach to linguistic and literary markup. For the latter,
                  see the fifth chapter of the current P5 edition of the TEI Guidelines
                  <q>A gentle introduction to XML</q> (Burnard and Bauman
                  2007).</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mIntro2.3.">Intro 2.3. Acknowledgements</h3>
               <div class="p">Although I can not possibly do justice to everyone who has provided useful
                  comments on or changes to the XML model described in these Guidelines, or by
                  editing and proofreading various passages of the text, I owe special thanks to the
                  following for their patience and courage: David J. Birnbaum, Ralph Cleminson,
                  Margaret Dimitrova, Antoaneta Granberg, Sebastian Kempgen, Predrag Matejić,
                  Anisava Miltenova, and Dilyana Radoslavova. All errors that remain are, of course,
                  my own.</div>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="mIntro3.">Intro 3. Abbreviations and acronyms</h2>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mIntro3.1.">Intro 3.1. Abbreviations and acronyms in the text</h3>
               <ul><li>
                     BCP: Best current practice (<a href="http://www.rfc-editor.org/categories/rfc-best.html/">http://www.rfc-editor.org/categories/rfc-best.html/</a>) </li><li>
                     CSS: Cascading Stylesheet (<a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2">http://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2</a>, Bos et al.2008) </li><li>
                     ISO: International Organization of Standardization <a href="http://www.iso.org/">http://www.iso.org/</a>
                  </li><li>
                     MASTER: Manuscript Access through Standards for Electronic
                     Records, <a href="http://www.ucl.ac.uk/ ~ucgadkw/mscat.html/">http://www.ucl.ac.uk/ ~ucgadkw/mscat.html/</a>
                  </li><li>
                     MS: manuscript </li><li>
                     MSS: manuscripts </li><li>
                     OASIS: The Organization for the Advancement of Structured
                     Information Standards <a href="http://www.oasis-open.org/">http://www.oasis-open.org/</a>
                  </li><li>
                     PDF: Portable Document Format (<a href="http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/adobepdf.html">http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/adobepdf.html</a>) </li><li>
                     PI: Public Identifier (Bray et al. 2008) </li><li>
                     RFC: Request for comments (<a href="http://www.ietf.org/rfc.html/">http://www.ietf.org/rfc.html/</a>) </li><li>
                     SGML – Standard Generalized Markup Language (ISO 8859:1987) </li><li>
                     SI: System Identifier (cf. Bray et al. 2008) </li><li>
                     TEI: Text Encoding Initiative Consortium (<a href="http://www.tei-c.org">http://www.tei-c.org</a>) </li><li>
                     W3C: World Wide Web Consortium (<a href="http://www.w3.org">http://www.w3.org</a>) </li><li>
                     XHTML: Extensible HyperText Markup Language (Altheim, McCarron
                     2001) </li><li>
                     XLink: XML Linking Language (DeRose et al. 2001) </li><li>
                     XML: Extensible Markup Language (Bray et al. 2008) </li><li>
                     XPath: XML Path Language (Clark, DeRose 1999) </li><li>
                     XPointer: XML Pointer Language (Grosso et al. 2003a, 2003b, DeRose
                     2003) </li><li>
                     XSL: Extensible Stylesheet Language (Berglund 2006) </li><li>
                     XSL:FO: Extensible Stylesheet Language Formatting Objects (cf.
                     XSL) </li><li>
                     XSLT: Extensible Stylesheet Language Transformations (Clark 1999)
                  </li></ul>
            </div>
         </div>
      
      
         <div>
            <h2 id="m1.">1. Introduction to the model</h2>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m1.1.">1.1. Short history</h3>
               <div class="p">The Repertorium Initiative started during 1994–95 as <i>Computer-Supported
                     Processing of Medieval Slavic Manuscripts</i>, an international project
                  with coordinators Prof. David J. Birnbaum (University of Pittsburgh) and Dr.
                  Anisava Miltenova (Institute of Literature, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences). The
                  project was supported by a grant from the International Research and Exchanges
                  Board (IREX), Washington, DC. During this period an initial SGML model was
                  developed by David J. Birnbaum, Anisava Miltenova, Milena Dobreva (Institute of
                  Mathematics and Informatics, BAS, Bulgaria), Berend Dijk, and Harry Gaylord (both
                  from the University of Groningen, the Netherlands). Further work on defining
                  content models, especially for textological, linguistic and palaeographical
                  features, was implemented in 1995 by David J. Birnbaum, Anisava Miltenova, and
                  Andrej Bojadžiev.</div>
               <div class="p">During the next three years (1996–98) the project continued as a joint initiative
                  under the guidance of Prof. Ralph Cleminson (Central European University
                  [Budapest, Hungary] and the University of Portsmouth [UK]) and Dr. Anisava
                  Miltenova, with the name <i>Computer Supported Processing of Medieval Slavic
                     Manuscripts and Early Printed Books</i> (a joint project supported by
                  Central European University). At this time more than one hundred manuscript
                  descriptions were encoded electronically and the project gained in popularity
                  among scholars.</div>
               <div class="p">At the Twelfth International Congress of Slavists in 1998 in Kraków the need for
                  markup technologies and standards and the lack of unified and well-established
                  terminology in the field of Slavic Medieval Studies became obvious, and a new
                     <i>Commission for the Computer Processing of Medieval Slavonic
                     Manuscripts and Early Printed Books</i> was chartered by the Executive
                  Board of the International Committee of Slavists (Miltenova et al. 1998). Members
                  of the Commission are scholars from more than twelve countries and the main
                  function of the Commission is to serve as a coordinator among projects in the
                  field.</div>
               <div class="p">In 1999–2000 the TEI P3 SGML model was transferred to TEI P4 XML syntax by David
                  J. Birnbaum. The team decided then to change not only the markup language, but
                  also the declarations of some elements and attributes, both to improve the overall
                  structure and to enhance the functionality of the schema. This stage of
                  development was completed in 2001–02. Since then the minor changes and
                  improvements that have been made to the model are, in most cases, backwards
                  compatible. An experimental Repertorium Workstation database was build on the
                  eXist-db native XML database (<a href="https://exist-db.org">https://exist-db.org</a>) by David J.
                  Birnbaum (Birnbaum 2009). It uses SVG technology to support the graphic
                  representation of textological differences and similarities.</div>
               <div class="p">This model was presented at conferences in Bulgaria, France, Greece, the
                  Netherlands, Poland, and the USA. Additionally, participants in the Repertorium
                  project conducted courses, lectures, and workshops about the Repertorium in
                  Bulgaria, Germany, Hungary, Russia, Serbia, Sweden, and the USA, .</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m1.2.">1.2. Sources for the XML model</h3>
               <div class="p">The Repertorium model relies fully on structured markup technologies. The first
                  variant was implemented in 1994–95 as an SGML Document Type Definition (ISO
                  8859:1987), based on TEI P3. The model presented here is based on Extensible
                  Markup Language (XML), a simplified and web-oriented variant of SGML, and
                  specifically on the Text Encoding Initiative Consortium (TEI) P5 schemas. The
                  Repertorium model reflects fifteen years of electronic philological descriptions
                  of more than three hundred Slavic medieval and early modern manuscripts.</div>
               <div class="p">From the beginning, the Repertorium manuscript description model, initially called
                  the Template for Slavic Manuscripts (TSM), was based closely on the ideas of the
                  Text Encoding Initiative and the schema fragments used there (TEI). The current
                  Repertorium Initiative XML model for manuscript description is designed as a
                  customization of top of TEI P5, implemented with by means of a TEI ODD
                  customization file. For the publication of Repertorium manuscript descriptions in
                  electronic form, the project relies on XQuery and XSLT scripts that transform the
                  input XML to XML, XHTML, and SVG.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m1.3.">1.3. The Text Encoding Initiative Consortium and the Repertorium</h3>
               <div class="p">The Repertorium Initiative uses the TEI models as a principal framework for
                  encoding and interchange. However, the Repertorium model extends some of the TEI
                  element and attribute definitions, thus providing opportunities for the encoder to
                  describe fully specific features of medieval Slavonic texts. Simultaneously with
                  our work, the TEI Consortium published its own model for manuscript description,
                  which is based primarily on the MASTER project, a European Initiative for the
                  description of Western European manuscripts. The principal differences between the
                  Repertorium and TEI models are described in full in appendices to these
                  Guidelines, along with formal definitions of Repertorium-specific additions and
                  other changes to the TEI P5 models.</div>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="m2.">2. Standards and recommendations implied in TEI P5</h2>
            <div class="p">Like other projects built on top of TEI P5 by means of ODD, the Repertorium 3.0 model
               can be represented in schemas in XML 1.0 DTD (Bray et al. 2008), Relax NG (Clark,
               Murata 2001, Clark 2002), and W3C Schema (Shudi, Sperberg, Thomson 2009, Peterson et
               al. 2009). From TEI P5 the Repertorium inherits the possibility of using all modern
               standards technologies from the XML family, including, for example, XSLT, XML
               namespaces (Bray et al. 2006), XQuery (Boag et al. 2011), XML Base (Marsh, Tobin
               2009), and others.</div>
            <div class="p">Repertorium 3.0 inherits all constructions in the syntax of attribute values from the
               TEI P5 infrastructure, where they are, in turn, expressed according to
               recommendations of the W3 Consortium and ISO standards, and various RFCs and BCPs.
               The attribute values for language codes follow BCP 47 (Philips, Davis 2006c), which
               comprises RFC 4646 (Philips, Davis 2006a) and RFC 4647 (Philips, Davis 2006c), which,
               in turn, follow ISO standards (cf. ISO 639-1, ISO 639-2). Four-letter codes for the
               names of scripts are from ISO 15924 (ISO 15924). Data in attributes that provide
               pointers to other locations in the same or in other documents (e.g.,
                  <code>@target</code> or <code>@lemmaRef</code>) should be expressed in terms of RFC 3986
               (Berners-Lee et al 2005). Temporal expressions in attributes follow the W3C XML
               Schema recommendation or ISO 8601 (cf. Shudi, Sperberg, Thomson 2009, Peterson et al
               2009, ISO 8601).</div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m2.1.">2.1. Visualization and publication</h3>
               <div class="p">Previous versions of the Repertorium use the XLink recommendation (DeRose et al.
                  2000) and CSS techniques (Bos et al. 2008) to visualize XML data directly without
                  transformation. In the current version this approach has been abandoned in favour
                  of transformation to XHTML (Altheim, McCarron 2001) and possibly to PDF through
                  XSLT and XSL-FO scripts. TEI P5 versions are managed with an XSL framework (made
                  available by Sebastian Rahtz) which can be further customized to meet the needs of
                  a particular project.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m2.2.">2.2. Public identifier and XML namespaces</h3>
               <div class="p">Until now the Repertorium Initiative has had no Public Identifier (PI), and
                  instead used system identifiers (SI) and XML catalog files (cf. Bray et al. 2008,
                  Walsh 2001). Beginning with the current version of the Repertorium guidelines, the
                  following PI will be used: <code>-// Repertorium//DTD Repertorium XML
                     V3.0/EN</code>.</div>
               <div class="p">For use with modern schema languages an XML Namespace designation is needed, and
                  we use <code>http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0</code>. All elements
                  defined by the TEI in the TEI namespace preserve their value despite the fact that
                  their content could be changed in some way, and only elements that are not present
                  in the TEI models are implemented in the Repertorium namespace.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m2.3.">2.3. The modules</h3>
               <div class="p">The Repertorium Initiative was intended from the ground up to be constructed as a
                  model for the description of medieval Slavic manuscripts. However in its XML
                  implementation it also has the ability to serve as a framework for the description
                  of other medieval traditions, such as Greek or Latin, because the philological
                  approaches for such investigations are much more similar than different. The
                  structures of catalogues of medieval European manuscripts share most of the same
                  features and should give answers to the same questions related to manuscript
                  contents, palaeography, and codicology.</div>
               <div class="p">Using the TEI infrastructure makes it possible to implement several parts of an
                  electronic text project within the same model. For example, it becomes possible to
                  express all imaginable aspects of text edition, source description, and graphical
                  representation of a text object, providing ready-to-use models at least in the
                  following areas:</div>
               <ul><li>description of the source (in our case, a manuscript) edition of the text
                     (with the appropriate segmentation into separate text units, apparatus
                     criticus, annotation of linguistic features, pointers to graphical
                     representations of the original source, etc.)</li><li>encoding bibliographic records related to description and edition</li><li>encoding metadata, including terms of use</li><li>construction of a model of a print dictionary</li><li>technical documentation of the XML infrastructure (model classes, elements,
                     entities, attributes, etc.)</li></ul>
               <div class="p">The TEI model that has served as the foundation for the Repertorium schema is
                  designed specifically to support the description of medieval manuscripts. The
                  required modules are:</div>
               <ul><li><b>tei</b> – the main module of the TEI Infrastructure (Burnard,
                     Bauman 2007: 1 <q>The TEI infrastructure</q>);</li><li><b>header</b> – common metadata information (Burnard and Bauman
                     2007: 2 <q>The TEI header</q>);</li><li><b>textstructure</b> – the default text structure (Burnard, Bauman
                     2007: 4 <q>Default text structure</q>);</li><li><b>core</b> – common core (Burnard and Bauman 2007: 3
                     <q>Elements
                     available in all TEI documents</q>);</li></ul>
               <div class="p">In addition to these required modules, several optional ones have been
                  included:</div>
               <ul><li><b>linking</b> – linking, segmentation, and alignment (Burnard and
                     Bauman 2007: 16
                     <q>Linking, segmentation, and alignment</q>);</li><li><b>analysis</b> – associates simple analyses and interpretations
                     with text elements (Burnard and Bauman 2007: 17
                     <q>Simple analytic mechanisms</q>);</li><li><b>certainty</b> – elements and attributes to indicate the degree of
                     certainty attached to the encoded text (Burnard and Bauman 2007: 21
                     <q>Certainty and
                     responsibility</q>);</li><li><b>figures</b> – representation of tables, formulae, figures and
                     graphics (Burnard and Bauman 2007: 14
                     <q>Tables, formulæ, and graphics</q>);</li><li><b>namesdates</b> – representation of names (of people, places,
                     organizations), times and dates (Burnard and Bauman 2007: 13
                     <q>Names, dates, people, and
                     places</q>);</li><li><b>transcr</b> – transcription of primary sources (Burnard, Bauman
                     2007: 11 <q>Representation of primary sources</q>).</li></ul>
               <div class="p">In the most recent Repertorium model, based on TEI P5, the modules for
                     <b>drama</b>, <b>verse</b>, and <b>feature
                     structures</b> were included. In practice they have never been used in our
                  work, and they have therefore been removed from the current model. The Repertorium
                  deviates from the prebuilt <a href="https://tei-c.org/guidelines/customization/#section-1"><q>TEI for manuscript description</q></a> customization
                  provided by the TEI by incorporating the standard TEI <b>analysis</b> and
                     <b>certainty</b> modules.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m2.4.">2.4. Some principles</h3>
               <div class="p">It was necessary to make a very precise comparison between the TEI P5 module for
                  manuscript description and the Repertorium model in order to reach the maximum
                  level of compatibility and interchangeability. To fulfill this task several
                  principles were formulated to govern the transformation of the prior Repertorium
                  schema into the present one:</div>
               <ul><li>All attributes and elements from the <b>core</b> and additional tag
                     sets that have been changed from TEI P4 to TEI P5 have been changed in
                     Repertorium 3.0, as well.</li><li>All attributes and elements that share the same functionality between TEI P5
                     and Repertorium have been renamed in favor of TEI P5.</li><li>No customizations are made on the level of TEI macro structures or on the
                     level of model classes, with two exceptions: model classes related to specific
                     manuscript description element and the exclusion of all numbered
                        <b>divLike</b> models and their corresponding elements. This
                     includes removal of <code>&lt;div1&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;div2&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;div3&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;div4&gt;</code>,
                        <code>&lt;div5&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;div6&gt;</code>, and <code>&lt;div7&gt;</code>.</li><li>When there is an element with the same name and a compatible content model
                     in TEI P5 and the Repertorium, it is declared in the TEI, not the Repertorium,
                     namespace, even if the given element name originated in an earlier version of
                     the Repertorium Initiative, prior to its introduction into TEI P5.</li><li>When there is no functional possibility in the
                     Repertorium model to express particular features, the elements from TEI P5 with
                     their names are taken without further customization. This is the case, for
                     example, with the element <code>&lt;additional&gt;</code>.</li><li>When the same information with the same functional characteristics was
                     expressed in different places in TEI P5 and the Repertorium, the Repertorium
                     model has been changed to match the TEI. This is the case, for example, with
                     the definition of manuscript origin. In early versions of the Repertorium
                     schema this was expressed with a <code>&lt;manuscriptCreation&gt;</code> element, placed
                     before the content description. However, in TEI P5 there is an element
                        <code>&lt;origin&gt;</code> with a similar function, which is part of the manuscript
                     history, placed almost at the end of the schema. In this case the Repertorium
                     model has been changed to agree with TEI P5.</li><li>When elements with different names share the same functional characteristics
                     even if their declarations differ to some extent, the elements from the TEI
                     namespace have been chosen. This is the case, for example, with the element
                        <code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code>, which replaces the original Repertorium
                        <code>&lt;articleContentDesc&gt;</code>, and the element <code>&lt;filiation&gt;</code> with the
                     attribute <code>@type</code>, which replaces earlier Repertorium
                        <code>&lt;antigraph&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;apograph&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;litRedaction&gt;</code>,
                        <code>&lt;protograph&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;source&gt;</code>, and <code>&lt;translation&gt;</code>
                     elements.</li><li>If one of the models provides a more general and simpler view and the other
                     has a structured model of the same information, an attempt has been made to
                     integrate both approaches into the declaration of element. This is the case,
                     for example, with <code>&lt;bindingDesc&gt;</code>. The declaration of this element in TEI
                     P5 is:
                        <pre>&lt;!ELEMENT bindingDesc ((%model.pLike; | decoNote | condition)+ | binding+)&gt;</pre>
                     The content of <code>&lt;binding&gt;</code> has been declared as
                        <pre>&lt;!ELEMENT binding (%model.pLike; | condition | decoNote)+&gt;</pre>
                     The proposed model leaves the declaration of <code>&lt;bindingDesc&gt;</code> without
                     changes but modifies the content of the element <code>&lt;binding&gt;</code> to include
                     structured information:
                        <pre>&lt;!ELEMENT binding (%model.pLike; | bindingNote |condition | decoNote)&gt;</pre></li><li>If there is an element in the Repertorium that has the same name as in TEI
                     P5 but a different meaning, the Repertorium element has been removed or
                     renamed. An example of such an element is <code>&lt;writing&gt;</code>, which was used in
                     earlier Repertorium schemas to provide general palaeographic information.
                     Because an element with the same name now exists in P5 with a completely
                     different meaning (<q>a passage of written text revealed to participants in the
                        course of a spoken text</q>, cf. Burnard and Bauman 2007), the Repertorium
                     element has been renamed <code>&lt;summary&gt;</code>.</li><li>Specific Repertorium elements and structures from earlier versions are
                     retained only if there are structural or semantic differences between the
                     Repertorium and TEI models. One example is the element <code>&lt;scribeDesc&gt;</code>,
                     which represent different points of view for manuscript description and is
                     presented in a different way by the TEI P5 Guidelines.</li><li>If in the TEI P5 Guidelines an element can be used with more than one
                     meaning, an attempt has been made to clarify the usage. This pertains, for
                     example, to elements such as <code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code>,
                        <code>&lt;msPart&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;accMat&gt;</code>.</li></ul>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="m3.">3. The main structure</h2>
            <div class="p">A manuscript description can occur in two different places in a Repertorium XML
               document. When the description (cataloguing information) serves as an introduction to
               the digital representation of transcribed text, it is encoded inside the
                  <code>&lt;teiHeader&gt;</code> element, where it provides metadata for the edition itself.
               However, when the goal of the project is focused on manuscript descriptions, without
               transcribed full text, the descriptive elements and content are regarded as primary
               data and the description itself becomes a primary object. In this case it serves no
               longer as metadata and must be entered instead as part of the content of the element
                  <code>&lt;body&gt;</code>.</div>
            <div class="p">The basic, wrapper element for a description is <code>&lt;msDesc&gt;</code> (manuscript
                  description), which serves as a container for seven additional
               subcomponents: general cataloguing information (<code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code>); headings
                  (<code>&lt;head&gt;</code>); information on physical characteristics and layout of the
               manuscript (<code>&lt;physDesc&gt;</code>); palaeographic and linguistic data
                  (<code>&lt;scribeDesc&gt;</code>); the description of the manuscript content as a whole, as
               separate texts, with any notes and colophon (<code>&lt;msContents&gt;</code>); conclusions about
               the time and place of writing of the manuscript and a sketch of the manuscript’s
               history (<code>&lt;history&gt;</code>); and a place for additional information the describer may
               need to include (<code>&lt;additional&gt;</code>). The only obligatory child of <code>&lt;msDesc&gt;</code>
               is <code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code>. All other main elements are optional.</div>
            <div class="p">Parts of convolutes and layers of palimpsests are represented by <code>&lt;msPart&gt;</code>
               elements. Additional notes by the authors of earlier descriptions and by owners of
               the manuscript form part of the element <code>&lt;accMat&gt;</code> (accompanying
                  material). The specification of the source could be extended further as
               part of the <code>&lt;recordHist&gt;</code> (recorded history) element at the end
               of the description (cf. Additional information).</div>
            <div class="p">Information is entered step by step, in an ordered and purposeful way. The first step
               concerns general cataloguing information; then comes information related to physical
               features of the manuscript, palaeography, language, content, sources of manuscript
               description; and, finally, administrative information, such as custodial history,
               restoration, available photocopies, and bibliographic information.</div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m3.1.">3.1. Levels of representation</h3>
               <div class="p">Descriptions of medieval manuscripts may differ significantly in both length and
                  structure. There are many competing or overlapping traditions in cataloguing
                  medieval materials, which means that similar information may look different and be
                  represented differently in different frameworks. The first thing to consider is
                  the completeness and length of the description.</div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m3.1.1.">3.1.1. Description with the <code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;head&gt;</code> elements</h4>
                  <div class="p">The briefest possible description consists of the elements
                        <code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;head&gt;</code>, as shown in the following example
                     (from Богдановић 1982: 25, No 153):
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;head&gt;</span>Homilies by Macarius of Egypt, Russian, 17th c., paper, XI+229 ff.,
       185x145 mm. Slavic translation from Greek from the year 1599. Notes by
       the scribe Stefan Jovanović<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/head&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Belgrade<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Patriarchal Library<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno&gt;</span>178<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msIdentifier&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">Even this checklist description could be further segmented into more discrete
                     units, so that the above information could be recorded differently from the
                     encoder’s point of view as:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;head type="briefDesc"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;term type="textClass"&gt;</span>Homilies<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/term&gt;</span> by <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;name type="author"&gt;</span>Macarius of
          Egypt<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/name&gt;</span>, <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;term type="lang"&gt;</span>Russian<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/term&gt;</span>, <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origDate&gt;</span>17th
          c.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/origDate&gt;</span>, <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;material&gt;</span>paper,<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/material&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;seg type="extent"&gt;</span> XI+229
          ff.,<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/seg&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;dimensions type="folia" unit="mm"&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;height&gt;</span>185<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/height&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;width&gt;</span>145<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/width&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/dimensions&gt;</span> 
       Slavic translation from Greek from the year <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;date type="translation"&gt;</span>1599<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/date&gt;</span>. 
       Notes by the scribe <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;name type="scribe"&gt;</span>Stefan Jovanović<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/name&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/head&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Belgrade<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Patriarchal Library<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno&gt;</span>178<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msIdentifier&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">In this more detailed version we attach the attribute <code>@type</code> to the
                     element <code>&lt;head&gt;</code> to make a distinction between the proper headings in some
                     editions and the heading that serves as a brief statement here, and we tag each
                     identifiable type of information with appropriate TEI elements. One rationale
                     for using this more complete approach would be a need to extract or search for
                     specific types of data, or to format different types of data differently during
                     rendering. Like TEI P5, the Repertorium model supports both sparsely and richly
                     tagged information, with the degree of detail determined by the requirements of
                     the individual project.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m3.1.2.">3.1.2. Description with <code>&lt;msIdentifier &gt;</code>and paragraphs</h4>
                  <div class="p">An alternative to the preceding involves the use of the element <code>&lt;p&gt;</code>,
                     which can unite all data related to physical description, palaeography,
                     language, and the manuscript’s provenance and history, as in the following
                     description of MS BAS 90 by Elena Tomova:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Bulgaria<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Sofia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Scientific Archives of the BAS<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno&gt;</span>90<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>Damaskin of priest Joan from 1788, 272 ff., paper of two types, both of
       bad quality, cf. Nikolaev 473b (1751), 608b (1779), 664 (1783). 1 column,
       23–29 lines per page. Literature: Иванов 1891: 83-112, 1892: 169-93;
       Цонев 1940: 180-81; Ангелов 1958; Кодов 1969: 227-32<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">If we decide to use just paragraphs, we can nonetheless select whatever
                     granularity we consider most appropriate to our purposes. For example, we can
                     divide the preceding information into smaller units in separate paragraphs, as
                     in the following example from Райков и др. 1994: 105:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName&gt;</span>Leitourgikon<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Greece<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;geogName&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;geogFeat&gt;</span>Mount<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/geogFeat&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;name&gt;</span>Athos<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/name&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/geogName&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;placeName&gt;</span>Zograph Monastery<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/placeName&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Monastery library<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>III.г.7<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p xml:id="material"&gt;</span>Paper - thin, rough and white. Watermark: scissors,
       similar to Briquet, Nr 3688 from the year 1496.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p xml:id="binding"&gt;</span>Binding: new, made in the library.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p xml:id="writing"&gt;</span>Writing: middle semi-uncial, 23 lines per page. Without
       decoration.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p xml:id="language"&gt;</span>Serbian.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p xml:id="photo"&gt;</span>Photograph from f. 1r<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p xml:id="biblio"&gt;</span>Райков, Кожухаров, Миклас, Кодов 1994, tabl. 176.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">In this example the cataloguing model consists of the identification of the
                     codex (<code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code>) and a sequence of paragraphs, each of which
                     provides information that is typed with the help of <code>@xml:id</code>. The
                     choice of paragraph types can be determined by the goals of the individual
                        project. (For example, <code>@xml:id</code> attributes must be unique in an
                        XML document instance, so the use of that attribute for typing would not be
                        appropriate in situations where a single XML document contains multiple
                           <code>&lt;msDesc&gt;</code> elements.)</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m3.1.3.">3.1.3. Extraction of information from a full description</h4>
                  <div class="p">Another way to obtain information in the form of a checklist or short catalogue
                     is to extract already existing data from a richer analytical description. For
                     this purpose, the form of the full-length catalogue must follow encoding rules
                     that will allow data extraction without loss of information. For example, small
                     summaries or overviews might coexist with more elaborated, structured features
                     of manuscript or text analysis, as in the following excerpt from an electronic
                     description of NBKM 848 by Margaret Dimitrova:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msContents&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;summary&gt;</span>The fragment contains 11 Lenten lessons; the last one includes only
       the first three verses from 2nd Lent Sunday to the 6th Sunday at Orthros
       (Palm day)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/summary&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct xml:id="ACD1"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus n="1"&gt;</span>1r<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;title&gt;</span>Mc 1:35-44;<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/title&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;note&gt;</span>The beginning is missing. <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;date&gt;</span>Saturday II<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/date&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/note&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct xml:id="ACD2"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus n="2"&gt;</span>1r–1v<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;title&gt;</span>Mc 2:1-12 <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/title&gt;</span> … 
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msContents&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">In this example the element <code>&lt;summary&gt;</code> precedes a more extensive,
                     formalized description of each text from the manuscript. This hybrid format
                     permits the use of XSLT or XQuery to extract whatever information might be
                     needed, from just the summary (for use in a short catalogue or shelflist) to
                     more specific details (for comparison or other types of analysis).</div>
               </div>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="m4.">4. Cataloguing information</h2>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m4.1.">4.1. General remarks</h3>
               <div class="p">Cataloguing information is an obligatory part of each manuscript description and
                  it should provide an introduction for researchers consisting of:</div>
               <ul><li>identification of manuscript name, as a type or genre (e.g., <i>Menaion</i> or <i>Triodion</i>) or as a
                     specific name that has become standardized in the research tradition (e.g., <i>Euchologium Sinaiticum</i>);</li><li>information about where the manuscript is kept, together with its
                     shelfmark(s);</li><li>optional additional notes</li></ul>
               <div class="p">The description thus begins with answers to questions like: What is the name of
                  the manuscript? Where it is now kept? Are there earlier descriptions? The answers
                  to all of these questions constitute part of the content of the element
                     <code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code> (manuscript identifier, Burnard and Bauman
                  2007). The encoder can provide information about the name of the manuscript
                     (<code>&lt;msName&gt;</code>), if it exists, and about the country, city or other
                  geographical region, and the institution, repository, or collection where the
                  manuscript can be found (Burnard and Bauman 2007:
                     <b>model.placeNamePart</b>). Between <code>&lt;msName&gt;</code> and following
                  structured information it is possible to insert a brief summary description in the
                  form of paragraph (cf. below). More information, including optional bibliographic
                  records or lists of records, may be entered as part of the element
                  <code>&lt;note&gt;</code>.</div>
               <div class="p">The element <code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code> (manuscript identifier) has <code>@type</code> and
                     <code>@subtype</code> attributes. These attributes may be used, for example, when
                  the manuscript is now lost or its place is now unknown, so that the type of
                  identifier is not current, and the electronic form represents an encoding of an
                  old description, and not the de visu observations of the current encoder.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m4.2.">4.2. The manuscript name</h3>
               <div class="p">The name of the manuscript is a word or a short phrase that can be used to
                  classify the manuscript according to a known scheme and to provide a special or
                  supplied name that has become established in the research tradition.</div>
               <div class="p">There are many characteristics involved in assigning a name to a manuscript. The
                  most important is the so-called generic or unified name, based on typological
                  characteristics, with values such as <i>Psalter</i> or <i>Miscellany</i>. In some cases manuscripts may also already have
                  unique names, such as <i>Codex Zographensis</i> or <i>Kodov Triodion</i>. These names should be provided
                  separately.</div>
               <div class="p">The <code>&lt;msName&gt;</code> element contains only plain text. The <code>@type</code>
                  attribute may be used to give further information whether the name is general
                  (i.e., unified or generic) or individual (nickname). The following example from
                  the description of <i>Codex Marianus</i> demonstrates the use of
                  this element:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName type="general" xml:lang="la"&gt;</span>Tetraeuangelion<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName type="general" xml:lang="bg"&gt;</span>Четвероевангелие<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName type="individual" current="yes" xml:lang="bg"&gt;</span>Мариинско евангелие<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName type="individual" subtype="current" xml:lang="la"&gt;</span>Codex Marianus<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName type="individual" subtype="old" xml:lang="en"&gt;</span>Grigorovič
    tetraeuangelion<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName type="individual" subtype="old" xml:lang="en"&gt;</span>Athonite
    tetraeuangelion<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">Here general information about the manuscript name in Latin and in Bulgarian is
                  annotated with the values <q>general</q> or <q>individual</q> for the
                     <code>@type</code> attribute. The manuscript name currently accepted among
                  scholars is <i>Codex Marianus</i> and the older names are <i>Grigorovič tetraeuangelion</i>, and <i>Athonite
                     tetraeuangelion</i>.</div>
               <div class="p">When the manuscript has different nicknames for separate parts that are kept in
                  different repositories, this information goes into corresponding sections of
                  description. In case of the <i>Codex Marianus</i>, there are two
                  leaves now kept in Vienna that have been known by two names that are no longer
                  generally used: <i>Mihanović folia</i> and <i>Miklošič folia</i>:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier xml:id="OENB146"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName type="individual" subtype="old"&gt;</span>Mihanović folia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName type="individual" subtype="old"&gt;</span>Miklošič folia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span> …
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m4.3.">4.3. A paragraph between the name of the manuscript and its location</h3>
               <div class="p">The use of this paragraph is restricted to cases when special annotation is needed
                  to summarize the locations of different parts of the same manuscript. The current
                  location in different countries, archives, or collections could require a special
                  description, possibly with links to sections on manuscript history, acquisition,
                  and to the various signatures or numbers in various catalogues. The following
                  extract from the description of <i>Manuilev Apostolos</i> by
                  Margaret Dimitrova and Andrej Bojadžiev illustrates this approach:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>Six fragments belonging to what was once a larger codex have been identified by
    Tixomirov …<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">This short introduction to the cataloguing information in the description of the
                     <i>Manuilev Apostle</i> is needed to understand the rest of the
                  description.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m4.4.">4.4. Location of the manuscript</h3>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m4.4.1.">4.4.1. General remarks</h4>
                  <div class="p">The next part of the electronic cataloguing information is devoted to the place
                     where the manuscript is kept. There are three levels for this information:
                     geographical pointers, institutional identification, and (optionally) data
                     regarding the collection in which the manuscript is kept. The latter often
                     appears as part of the shelfmark designation. The order of these elements is
                     important, proceeding from largest to smallest:</div>
                  <ol><li>country</li><li>geographical region</li><li>city or place name</li><li>repository</li><li>collection</li><li>shelfmark, inventory number or some other designation</li></ol>
                  <div class="p">This set of elements is followed by optional identifying information based on
                        <dfn>secundo folio</dfn> and bibliographic records.</div>
                  <div class="p">Following example from the description of MS Plovdiv 25 by Desislava Atanasova
                     illustrates the usage of the element:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Bulgaria<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Plovdiv<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Plovdiv National Library<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>25<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m4.4.2.">4.4.2. Country</h4>
                  <div class="p">The simplest content of the element <code>&lt;country&gt;</code> is the name of country,
                     e.g.:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Bulgaria<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">In some cases it may be useful to provide a country code as well as a country
                     name. This can be achieved by supplying a value to the <code>@key</code>
                     attribute. It is recommended by the TEI that this value follow the country
                     names and codes defined by ISO 3166 (Burnard and Bauman 2007:
                     <code>&lt;country&gt;</code>). The encoder can choose among three representations defined
                     in the standard: alpha-2 code (two-letter, ISO 3166-1-alpha-2-code), alpha-3
                     code (three-letter, ISO 3166-1-alpha-3-code), and numeric code (ISO
                     3166-numeric). The three variants are illustrated below:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country key="bg"&gt;</span>Bulgaria<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country key="BGR"&gt;</span>Bulgaria<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country key="100"&gt;</span>Bulgaria<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">For the full list see Common Data Hub: ISO 3166 Country Codes.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m4.4.3.">4.4.3. Settlement (city or town, etc.)</h4>
                  <div class="p">The next part of the cataloguing information is related to the place where the
                     manuscript is currently kept. Two different elements are provided for this
                     purpose. In most cases the manuscript is kept in libraries or archives in
                     cities, for which the element <code>&lt;settlement&gt;</code> is used:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Sankt Peterburg<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">The type of settlement may be specified more precisely by adding a standard
                     value for the <code>@type</code> attribute, as in this example:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement type="town"&gt;</span>Kazanlăk<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m4.4.4.">4.4.4. Region</h4>
                  <div class="p">When the name of place is not well known or where there could be two or more
                     places with the same name, an additional element <code>&lt;region&gt;</code> may be added.
                     The <code>&lt;region&gt;</code> element describes an administrative unit smaller than a
                     country but larger than a city, town, or village (Burnard and Bauman 2007:
                        <code>&lt;region&gt;</code>), as in the following example, where Alino is a village in
                     the Sofia province (<i>oblast</i>) of Bulgaria, but not within
                     the city limits of Sofia:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;region type="district"&gt;</span>Sofia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/region&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement type="village"&gt;</span>Alino<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m4.4.5.">4.4.5. Place and geographical names</h4>
                  <div class="p">When a codex is kept in a specific place not normally considered a region or
                     settlement, e.g., in a monastery, the alternative elements <code>&lt;placeName&gt;</code>
                     and <code>&lt;geogName&gt;</code> may be used. These elements are part of the TEI element
                     infrastructure and may contain plain text, sub-elements like <code>&lt;region&gt;</code>
                     (for some places that are smaller than countries, but bigger than cities) or
                        <code>&lt;district&gt;</code> (for names of non-administrative, geographical places).
                     With the help of <code>&lt;geogFeat&gt;</code> we can encode such geographical features as
                     valley, river, mount, etc. (Burnard and Bauman 2007: <code>&lt;geogFeat&gt;</code>). We can
                     then provide the name of the place using the general-purpose <code>&lt;name&gt;</code>
                     element.</div>
                  <div class="p">The choice in this case should be made on the level of the whole project,
                     unifying the structure of the information in order to format, transform or
                     search the data. For example, a possible encoding for manuscripts kept at the
                     Zograph Monastery on Mount Athos could look like the following:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;geogName&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;geogFeat&gt;</span>Mount<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/geogFeat&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;name&gt;</span>Athos<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/name&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/geogName&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;placeName type="monastery"&gt;</span>Zograph monastery<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/placeName&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">The same information could be encoded in at least two other ways. The first is
                     using a general purpose element <code>&lt;name&gt;</code> with a <code>@type</code> attribute,
                     e.g.:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;name type="monastery"&gt;</span>Zograph monastery<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/name&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">The other is to use a special referencing string as the value of the
                        <code>@key</code> attribute, e.g.:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;placeName key="ZM" type="monastery"&gt;</span>Zograph Monastery<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/placeName&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">In the last example the <code>&lt;placeName&gt;</code> element has two special attributes.
                     As explained in the TEI Guidelines <code>@key</code>
                     <q>provides an externally-defined means of identifying the entity (or entities)
                        being named, using a coded value of some kind</q>. (Burnard and Bauman 2007:
                        <b>att.canonical/key</b>) and <code>@type</code> is intended to be used
                     as a general characteristic of the place name. A project that observes this
                     convention should provide a list of abbreviations, one of which would be
                        ZM (= Zograph Monastery). For the manuscripts
                     kept in the St. Catherine Monastery on Mount Sinai the same model is also
                     appropriate, e.g.:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Egypt<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;geogName&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;geogFeat&gt;</span>Mount<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/geogFeat&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;name&gt;</span>Sinai<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/name&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/geogName&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m4.4.6.">4.4.6. Repository (library, archive, etc.)</h4>
                  <div class="p">The next piece of information in the electronic description,
                        <code>&lt;repository&gt;</code>, identifies a public or private library or archive. This
                     element should contain a common or official designation, as in this example
                     from the electronic description of MS IX.H.16 by Irina Kuzidova:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Czech Republic<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Prague<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>National Museum<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m4.4.7.">4.4.7. Name of the institution</h4>
                  <div class="p">Sometimes the repository in which a manuscript is located is part of another
                     institution, and in such cases the name of the institution comes before the
                     name of the archive, as in the following examples:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;institution&gt;</span>University of Sofia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/institution&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Central University Library<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
</pre>
                     or
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;institution&gt;</span>Bulgarian Academy of Sciences<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/institution&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Scientific Archives<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m4.4.8.">4.4.8. Shelfmarks, inventory and catalogue designations</h4>
                  <div class="p">This information is provided as the content of the element <code>&lt;idno&gt;</code>. The
                        <code>&lt;idno&gt;</code> element has an <code>@type</code> value that specifies whether
                     the identification is a shelfmark, inventory number, or catalogue number. This
                     attribute value is especially important in archives that combine several
                     collections that may be arranged and identified according to former owners or
                     thematic principles. In practice, shelfmarks are often formed from the initials
                     or special codes for separate collections. Typical examples could be:</div>
                  <div class="p">1. shelfmark:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>Пог. 8<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">2. Designation in the catalogue:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="catalogue"&gt;</span>1<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">3. Identifying information in an inventory catalogue:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="inventory"&gt;</span>5/1946<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m4.4.9.">4.4.9. Current and former shelfmarks, catalogue numbers, and inventory
                     numbers</h4>
                  <div class="p">The best way to differentiate between current and former designations is to
                     embed <code>&lt;idno&gt;</code> elements for non-current identifiers inside
                        <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code> elements. Consider the following examples:</div>
                  <div class="p">1. Manuscript with shelfmark, inventory number, and catalogue number (from the
                     electronic description of MS 1415 of NLCM, Sofia by Dilyana Radoslavova):
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Sofia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>National Library SS Cyril and Methodios<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>1415<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="inventory"&gt;</span>2/977<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="catalogue"&gt;</span>1415<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msIdentifier&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">2. Manuscript with current and several former shelfmarks (from the electronic
                     description of MS 1/102 of Odessa State Libary by Anisava Miltenova):
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Ukraine<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Odessa<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>State Library<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;collection&gt;</span>V. Grigorovič<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/collection&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>1/102<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="former"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>1/211<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="former"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>20<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="former"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>34<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="catalogue"&gt;</span>20<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msIdentifier&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">In this example the manuscript has one current and three former shelfmarks and
                     it is described in the catalogue as item number 20.</div>
                  <div class="p">By setting the value of the <code>@type</code> attribute in the
                        <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code> element the encoder can choose between the values
                        <q>current</q> and <q>former</q> and then supply appropriate values in its
                     sub-elements, e.g.:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="current"&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>Ms 3045<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m4.4.10.">4.4.10. Collections</h4>
                  <div class="p">Some repositories use a complex archiving system with special divisions among
                     separate collections and archives. Very often the sections bear the names of
                     previous owners or commissioners, which can be represented with the
                        <code>&lt;collection&gt;</code> element. The <code>@type</code> and <code>@subtype</code>
                     attributes are available for cases where a more detailed characterization is
                     necessary.</div>
                  <div class="p">The <code>&lt;collection&gt;</code> element may contain unstructured (plain) text, e.g.:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;collection&gt;</span>П. Сырку<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/collection&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno&gt;</span>15<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">In this fragment it is stated that the collection belongs to the materials of
                     P. Syrku and is catalogued under the number 15.</div>
                  <div class="p">When thе <code>&lt;collection&gt;</code> element appears, it is immediately followed by the
                     shelfmark or inventory number as an identification inside the collection, as in
                     the following example (from the electronic description of a Vidin Miscellany by
                     Antoaneta Granberg):
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;collection&gt;</span>M. Pogodin<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/collection&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>Pog. 1204<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="current"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="catalogue"&gt;</span>77<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msIdentifier&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">In some cases the current collection of a repository may have absorbed an
                     entire earlier repository collection. This is often the case in Russian
                     collections like the Russian National Library in Sankt-Petersburg, the
                     Historical Museum, the Russian State Library, and the Russian State Archive of
                     Ancient Acts. In this case it is helpful to include this information, as well,
                     e.g.:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName&gt;</span>Hitrovo Evangelion<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Russia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Moscow<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Russian State Library<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;collection&gt;</span>ф. 304. III.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/collection&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>3<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="former"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;collection&gt;</span>M.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/collection&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>8657<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="former"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;collection&gt;</span>Tr.-Serg. Lavra<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/collection&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>3<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msIdentifier&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m4.4.11.">4.4.11. Various parts of the manuscript in one repository</h4>
                  <div class="p">In this case information about the country, city, geographical or place names,
                     and repository remain the same, and only information about the shelfmarks,
                     collections, or catalogue numbers differ. This approach is illustrated below
                     with the description of the <i>Pirdop Apostle</i> by Dimitrinka
                     Dimitrova:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName xml:lang="bg"&gt;</span>Пирдопски апостол<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName xml:lang="en"&gt;</span>Pirdop Apostle<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Bulgaria<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Sofia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>National Library SS Cyril and Methodios<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier xml:id="NBKM497"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>497<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="inventory"&gt;</span>237<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;note place="inline"&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref type="bibl" target="../bibliography/TsonevB1923"&gt;</span>Цонев II, с. 70, Nr 497<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/note&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier xml:id="NBKM90"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>90<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="inventory"&gt;</span>588<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;note place="inline"&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref type="bibl" target="../bibliography/TsonevB1910"&gt;</span>Цонев I, с. 31-33, Nr 90<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/note&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msIdentifier&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m4.4.12.">4.4.12. One and the same manuscript in different repositories</h4>
                  <div class="p">When the manuscript has become separated, with fragments now stored in
                     different repositories, the encoder should use the element
                        <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code> to designate each part. There are two main cases:</div>
                  <ul><li>If the manuscript is separated into one larger part and several smaller
                        pieces, the cataloguing part of the description could be included
                        immediately after <code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code> and the other parts inside
                           <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code> elements.</li><li>An alternative approach, which does not encode a distinction between main
                        and minor parts, is to designate all parts inside <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code>
                        elements. This approach could be used especially when there is no
                        unambiguous main part. The following information about the Slepcha Apostol
                        illustrates one way of representing cataloguing information about a
                        manuscript that has become fragmented across repositories:
                        <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName xml:lang="bg"&gt;</span>Слепченски апостол<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName xml:lang="en"&gt;</span>Slepcha Apostle<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="partial" xml:id="SPLFpI101"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Russia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>St. Petersburg<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>State Public Library<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>F. p. I. 101<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="partial" xml:id="RAS2446"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Russia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>St. Petersburg<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Russian Academy of Sciences <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>24.4.6.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;collection&gt;</span>I. Sreznevskij<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/collection&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="CS"&gt;</span>Srez. 53<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="partial" xml:id="RSL_Grig14"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Russia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Moscow<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Russian State Library<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>Grig. 14<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;collection&gt;</span>Grig.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/collection&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="former"&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>M. 1696<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Bulgaria<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Plovdiv<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Plovdiv National Library<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>No 25<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="catalogue"&gt;</span>62<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msIdentifier&gt;</span>
</pre></li></ul>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m4.4.13.">4.4.13. Summary informaation about the <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;idno
                     &gt;</code>elements</h4>
                  <div class="p">In an analytical catalogue where there may be combinations of former and
                     current collections and shelfmarks in a repository, it is often useful to
                     encode all these designations. The encoder can then further explain the history
                     of the manuscript in sections about its origin, provenance, and
                     acquisition.</div>
                  <div class="p">The <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code> element may be used in the Repertorium approach as a
                     child of <code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code> is to represent the current or old
                     identification of a codex or to distinguish among parts of one and the same
                     manuscript now dispersed within one or over more than one repository.</div>
                  <div class="p">The element <code>&lt;idno&gt;</code>, on the other hand, is used for various kinds of
                     designations, such as shelfmarks and inventory or catalogue numbers. In this
                     approach, if we have a part of the manuscript in one repository with an old
                     shelfmark or collection identification that is still in use, it is necessary to
                     allow <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code> to appear elsewhere, in the description of other
                     parts, as in:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="partial" xml:id="RSL_Grig14"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Russia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Moscow<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Russian State Library<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>Grig. 14<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;collection&gt;</span>V. Grigorovic<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/collection&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="former"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>M. 1696<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">In this example both Grig. 14 and M. 1696 are used as identifiers even though
                     the latter points to a previous owner. In this case the shelfmark signifies the
                     intermediate change of owner. Further details should be given in the section
                     about the history of the codex.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m4.4.14.">4.4.14. Secundo folio</h4>
                  <div class="p">This element is very rare in the Slavic medieval and early modern tradition,
                     but for western medieval manuscripts it has been (mainly between the thirteenth
                     and sixteenth centuries) a common component of manuscript description. The term
                     refers to transcribing the first word or words from the second leaf of a codex.
                     The element <code>&lt;secFol&gt;</code> (Lat. secundo folio, or Eng.
                        second folio) is used for this purpose (Burnard and Bauman
                     2007: <code>&lt;secFol&gt;</code>). The following example, from a description of MS Crispin
                     16, Dutschke et al. 1987: 35–36, illustrates this usage:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;secFol&gt;</span>dixit ad me<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/secFol&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m4.4.15.">4.4.15. Additional information in the catalogue description</h4>
                  <div class="p">All other data could be entered at the end of <code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code> or
                        <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code> elements as part of the content of a <code>&lt;note&gt;</code>
                     element. Typical information includes internal or external bibliographic or
                     other pointers, notes about the attribution of a manuscript, etc.</div>
               </div>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="m5.">5. Codicological information</h2>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.1.">5.1. General remarks</h3>
               <div class="p">The markup definition of the physical structure should be entered in the element
                     <code>&lt;physDesc&gt;</code> (Burnard and Bauman 2007), which unites information about the
                  physical condition of the manuscript with observations about the material, layout,
                  binding, and decoration. The encoder can choose between two options:</div>
               <ul><li>To provide a very short sketch of different features of the manuscript in
                     paragraphs, or</li><li>To use special elements in a structured description of material, layout,
                     binding, decoration, etc.</li></ul>
               <div class="p">For the former approach the encoder should use only paragraphs, as in this example
                  from the electronic description of MS CIAI 369 by Margaret Dimitrova (simplified):
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;physDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>4+516 ff. (Stojanov wrongly gives 273ff.). Paper with watermark of three
       cylinders with letters FA. 230 x 180 mm. In 1 column, 30 lines per page<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>Greek cursive of the 19th century.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>The original binding is preserved: leather on boards. Remains of clasps.
       Blind-tooled frames of floral motifs and blind stamped central medallions on
       both covers.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>The codex is in good condition. The folios containing the Table of contents
       are now unfolded. Originally they formed the last quire of the
       manuscript.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/physDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">The element <code>&lt;physDesc&gt;</code> has no special attributes. Its only use is to
                  contain elements that encode the physical characteristics of the manuscript.</div>
               <div class="p">The second approach also permits the use of the element <code>&lt;p&gt;</code>, in this case
                  for an introduction to the physical description.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.2.">5.2. Description of material and layout</h3>
               <div class="p">Information about manuscript materials and their characteristics and about the
                  layout of the leaves is encoded within <code>&lt;objectDesc&gt;</code>. This element has one
                  special attribute, <code>@form</code>, with proposed values (cf. Burnard and Bauman
                  2007) <q>codex</q>, <q>roll</q>, <q>fragment</q>, <q>leaf</q>,
                     <q>partial leaf</q>, or some typologically relevant value, e.g.:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;objectDesc form="codex"&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/objectDesc&gt;</span>
</pre>
                  or
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;objectDesc form="roll"&gt;</span> …<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/objectDesc&gt;</span>
</pre>
               </div>
               <div class="p">This information could be entered as an unstructured sequence of paragraphs or as
                  part of the content of the specialized elements <code>&lt;supportDesc&gt;</code> and
                     <code>&lt;layoutDesc&gt;</code> .</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.3.">5.3. Description of physical support</h3>
               <div class="p">The information in <code>&lt;supportDesc&gt;</code> may be entered in two ways: <ul><li>as an unstructured (paragraph) view, or</li><li>using specialized elements.</li></ul> Here we illustrate an overview of the use of structured data for various
                  aspects of cataloguing the support. </div>
               <div class="p"><code>&lt;supportDesc&gt;</code> has one important attribute, <code>@material</code>. Valuea of
                  this attribute, as suggested by TEI Guidelines (Burnard and Bauman 2007:
                     <code>&lt;supportDesc&gt;</code>), are most commonly <q>parchment</q>, <q>paper</q>, or
                     <q>mixed</q>, as in this example:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;supportDesc material="paper"&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/supportDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">The meaning of the value of this attribute is to give a general type of the
                  material of the manuscript, and it is not associated with the possible
                  construction of manuscript’s binding or the box in which the manuscript is kept.
                  Especially in cases when the value is <q>mixed</q>, a further explanation should
                  be provided.</div>
               <div class="p">The order of information in this element is significant, and follows traditional
                  paper-based descriptions. There is no required minimal content, and the range of
                  information depends on the opportunities the researcher may have had to work with
                  the manuscript de visu. A brief explanation of the proposed elements is as
                  follows:</div>
               <ul><li><code>&lt;support&gt;</code>: describes in more detail the material of the leaves or
                     roll</li><li><code>&lt;extent&gt;</code>: describes the size of manuscript in terms like number of
                     folia or pages, or the length of the roll</li><li><code>&lt;foliation&gt;</code> and/or <code>&lt;pagination&gt;</code>: information about whether the
                     manuscript is foliated (paginated), with further explanation</li><li><code>&lt;collation&gt;</code>: description of the folia collation, ruling, pricking,
                     and other features related to the quire structure</li><li><code>&lt;condition&gt;</code>: an overview of possible damage, absence or addition of
                     folia, blank leaves, etc.</li></ul>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.4.">5.4. Detailed description of material</h3>
               <div class="p">This information could be entered as plain text in the form of paragraphs
                     (<code>&lt;p&gt;</code>) in the element <code>&lt;support&gt;</code> or as one or more instances of the
                  element <code>&lt;material&gt;</code>. It contains a brief statement that can serve as an
                  overview of a more in-depth description that can follow. Here is an example of the
                  first type, from the electronic description of MS Rila 3/6 by Dilyana Radoslavova,
                  simplified:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;support&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>Paper with <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;watermark&gt;</span>Harbalet in Ring<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/watermark&gt;</span>: similar to
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;bibl&gt;</span>Harlfinger Nr. 2/a<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/bibl&gt;</span> from the years 1471–72<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/support&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">In the case of an analytical description we may choose to use a paragraph as just
                  an introduction to a more elaborate description of the material, or we may use
                  only one or more <code>&lt;material&gt;</code> elements, with the decision often depending on
                  the completeness of available information. For example, if we are describing a
                  manuscript that we have not been able to examine de visu, or are creating an
                  electronic edition on the basis of an old catalogue, we may lack information about
                  the paper or quality of parchment. In such cases we may ignore the
                     <code>&lt;support&gt;</code> section of the description and provide the information we do
                  have only as the value of the attribute <code>@material</code> on the element
                     <code>&lt;supportDesc&gt;</code>, as in the example above.</div>
               <div class="p">In contrast with this, when we use one or more <code>&lt;material&gt;</code> elements not as
                  part of <code>&lt;p&gt;</code>, that means that we have enough information to provide a
                  detailed parchment or paper description of the codex. Consider the following
                  template:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;supportDesc material="mixed"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;support&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;material key="parchment"&gt;</span>Here is the information about parchment.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/material&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;material key="paper"&gt;</span>Here is the information about paper.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/material&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/support&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/supportDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">Here the <code>@key</code> attribute is used to distinguish the different materials
                  in the manuscript. The element <code>&lt;material&gt;</code> can include an attribute
                     <code>@material</code>, with values that might include (but are not limited to):
                     <ul><li><q>original</q>: original parchment used for the main body of the
                        manuscript</li><li><q>reused</q>: reused parchment (palimpsest) or paper</li><li><q>supplement</q>: a supplement written for the original
                        manuscript</li><li><q>restoration</q>: added during the restoration process</li><li><q>endleaf</q>: use for the end leaves</li><li><q>pastedown</q>: leaf or leaves glued to the inside of a
                        board</li><li><q>binding</q>: part of the binding (but not the only part of
                        it)</li><li><q>wrapper</q>: a wrapper for the manuscript</li><li><q>distinct</q>: an originally distinct leaf or leaves, bound with
                        the manuscript at a latter date</li><li><q>other</q>: cases that could not be formalized clearly in
                        advance</li></ul></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.5.">5.5. Description of parchment</h3>
               <div class="p">The description of parchment is restricted to the technological process and its
                  outer appearance. However, the encoder might wish to add a statement regarding the
                  origin, quality, color and thickness of the parchment, as in the following
                  examples (from <a href="https://www.mossercatalogue.net/record.php?recID=Hg">https://www.mossercatalogue.net/record.php?recID=Hg</a>):
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;material key="parchment" usage="original"&gt;</span>More probably sheep than calf…of
    middling thickness and quality, with a good mat (velvety) finish" (Doyle and
    Parkes 1979: xxi), trimmed and very stained.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/material&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;material key="parchment" usage="restoration"&gt;</span>Portions eroded (gnawed by rats?)
    have been replaced with blank parchment (1956).<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/material&gt;</span>
</pre>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.6.">5.6. Description of paper</h3>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.6.1.">5.6.1. General remarks</h4>
                  <div class="p">The description of paper in recent catalogues is much more complicated than the
                     description of parchment. On the one hand, there are various levels of detailed
                     information in the catalogues, and, on the other, there are much more
                     specialized research initiatives in the field of paper and watermark studies.
                     Therefore, the description of the paper in a manuscript could consist of an
                     overview and comments followed by a description of watermarks and of other
                     aspects of the paper production. A simple paper description is illustrated by
                     the following excerpt from the electronic description of Add. Ms 37233 by
                     Dilyana Radoslavova (simplified):
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;material usage="original"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;dim type="format"&gt;</span>4°<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/dim&gt;</span>thick, rough, non-glazed paper <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/material&gt;</span>
</pre>
                  </div>
                  <div class="p">The description of obviously different kind of paper, possibly from various
                     manufactures and of varying quality and age, could be accomplished by repeating
                     the element <code>&lt;material&gt;</code> and its attributes exactly in the same manner as
                     it is implemented for the description of parchment.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.6.2.">5.6.2. Watermarks</h4>
                  <div class="p">The central and most important information in the description of the paper is
                     the watermark, and information on its characteristics is part of the element
                        <code>&lt;watermark&gt;</code>. The content of this element includes phrase-level
                     elements, as well as specialized elements like <code>&lt;countermark&gt;</code> and
                        <code>&lt;motif&gt;</code>.</div>
                  <div class="p">There are several special attributes for the content of this element.
                        <code>@tracing</code> is used to describe very briefly (with one word) the
                     method of watermark tracing. The most usual method is still drawing by hand,
                     but other possibilities include rubbing by hand, use of special Dylux print
                     paper, beta- or x-radiography, scanning, etc. The <code>@place</code> attribute
                     from the <b>class att.placement</b> class can specify more precisely
                     the location of the watermark on the page. This feature could be described in
                     relation to chain and laid (also called wire) lines. The possible content might
                     read something like <q>between widely spaced chain lines</q>, <q>on a chain
                        line</q>, <q>on a supplemental chain line</q>, <q>across 2 chain lines</q>,
                        <q>across 3 chain lines</q>, or could be expressed in some other terms,
                     e.g., in millimeters between various locations on the leaf.</div>
                  <div>
                     <h5 id="m5.6.2.1.">5.6.2.1. Motif</h5>
                     <div class="p">The element <code>&lt;motif&gt;</code> is the most important part of the watermark
                        description because it is intended to represent information from a special
                        terminological apparatus of watermark design. There are several ways to
                        include motif information:</div>
                     <ul><li>In the absence of reference books and watermark albums, simply as
                           plain text</li><li>If a more complicated motif is present and the encoder would like to
                           provide full compatibility with professional watermark databases, with
                           the attribute <code>@type</code>, as described below</li><li>By <q>secondary</q> is meant designs above or below the basic motif.
                           Frequently used motifs above the basic one include bird, cross, flower,
                           monograms, monograms with a combination with figures (e.g., monogram BA
                           and cross), ramrod, different star shapes, star and monogram, trefoil,
                           etc. Frequently used motifs below the basic one include grapes,
                           monograms, etc.</li><li>By <q>supplemental</q> is meant supplemental characteristics of the
                           basic motif, e.g., in circle, in oval, in shield, etc.</li></ul>
                     <div class="p">In this approach a typical description of the motif <q>anchor in circle with
                           5-point star above</q> could be encoded hierarchically, as follows:
                        <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;motif type="basic"&gt;</span>anchor
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;motif type="supplemental"&gt;</span>in circle<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/motif&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;motif type="secondary"&gt;</span>with star/5-point above<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/motif&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/motif&gt;</span>
</pre>
                     </div>
                  </div>
                  <div>
                     <h5 id="m5.6.2.2.">5.6.2.2. Countermark</h5>
                     <div class="p">The <code>&lt;countermark&gt;</code> element has the same content and attributes as a
                           <code>&lt;watermark&gt;</code> element. For example:
                        <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;material&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;watermark tracing="drawing"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;motif type="basic"&gt;</span>Leo<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/motif&gt;</span> within <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;motif type="supplemental"&gt;</span>circle<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/motif&gt;</span> 
       surmounted by <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;motif type="secondary"&gt;</span>quatrefoil<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/motif&gt;</span> and with
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;countermark&gt;</span>AP<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/countermark&gt;</span> similar to <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref&gt;</span>Nikolaev #125<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span>
       from the year <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;date cert="yes"&gt;</span>1585<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/date&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/watermark&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/material&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  </div>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.7.">5.7. A <code>&lt;note&gt;</code> inside <code>&lt;material&gt;</code></h3>
               <div class="p">The meaning of this note is to enable the encoder to describe other features of
                  the material, which is especially important for the description of paper. Although
                  not structured in a systematic way, the information to be entered here might
                  involve:</div>
               <ul><li>
                     <dfn>Wire lines</dfn>: Information about wire (also known as laid) lines
                     could contain: <ul><li>The density of the wire lines as the measure of 20 wirelines (in mm) —
                           a standard procedure common in paper descriptions;</li><li>Description of wire lines, usually in terms like: thin wire lines;
                           thick wire lines; alternating thick and thin; very thick wire lines;
                           thick wire lines, thin lines at edges; wire lines in corrugated pattern;
                           wires wrapped around the chain lines; alternate wires wrapped around the
                           chains; etc.</li></ul>
                  </li><li><dfn>Chain or laid lines</dfn>: The most important feature of chain lines
                     is the spacing between them, which could be described by entering the element
                        <code>&lt;dim&gt;</code> and its sub element <code>&lt;height&gt;</code>. The following are
                     recommendations from the Watermark Initiative: <q>If the watermark is on the
                        chain line the spaces on either side of it should be given in parentheses:
                        28,25,(15,14),28,25. If the watermark is positioned between or across two
                        chain lines, the space between them should be given in parentheses:
                        44,45,(50),47,43</q> (<a href="http://abacus.bates.edu/Faculty/wmarchive/FORM_ descriptions.html">http://abacus.bates.edu/Faculty/wmarchive/FORM_ descriptions.html</a>). An example of such description is provided as well: <q>04. Wire/Chain line
                        description: Density of Wirelines: 26 mm. for 20 wirelines. (style: thin
                        wirelines) Chain line Interval(s): / 50 mm.</q></li><li><dfn>Paper or parchment thickness</dfn>: The data on paper thickness could
                     be entered in the element <code>&lt;dim&gt;</code> with the <code>@type</code> attribute and a
                     thickness value. This value could be relative, e.g.: very thin, thin, medium
                     thin, medium, medium thick, thick, very thick; or, alternatively, it could be
                     measured in another way.</li><li><dfn>Paper or parchment color</dfn>: This information could be entered as
                     content of the element
                     <code>&lt;colour&gt;</code>.</li><li><dfn>Texture</dfn>: Terms in common use to describe the texture of paper
                     include: smooth, matte, fuzzy, patina, glazed, bumpy, etc. It is also possible
                     to record whether dark fibers or wire lines are visible on the surface of the
                     paper.</li><li><dfn>Stiffness</dfn>: Information about the stiffness of paper is rare in
                     manuscript descriptions, but possible values could include: stiff, crisp,
                     supple, limp, etc.</li><li>
                     <div class="p"><dfn>Date of the paper</dfn>: The dating of paper is usually part of the
                        watermark description, which is the most familiar location for that
                        information because the watermark image is the most characteristic part of
                        the paper description. In addition to providing the date or date range, the
                        encoder could further specify the justification for the dating. Possible
                        values could include: <ul><li>published watermark(s) cited in references</li><li>codex date given in scribal note</li><li>codex dated on palaeographical grounds</li><li>codex dated by comparison of papers</li><li>codex dated from other evidence</li><li>the paper associated with binding</li></ul></div>
                     <div class="p">The date range could be entered with the asterisk (*) as a wildcard, so
                        that, for example, the expression <q>15**</q> would mean the range from 1500
                        to 1599, <q>156*</q>, from 1560 to 1569, and <q>156*–157*</q> - each year
                        from 1560 up to 1579.</div>
                  </li><li><dfn>References</dfn>: References are specified inside the elements
                        <code>&lt;bibl&gt;</code> or <code>&lt;listBibl&gt;</code>.</li></ul>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.8.">5.8. Number of leaves or folia</h3>
               <div class="p">The number of folia in the manuscript is entered in the element <code>&lt;extent&gt;</code>,
                  which may be accompanied by the element <code>&lt;measure&gt;</code> with the attribute
                     <code>@unit</code> to specify whether the count refers to leaves or to pages.
                  Consider the following example from the description of manuscript 369 from the
                  Church Historical and Archival Institute in Sofia:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;extent&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;measure unit="folia"&gt;</span>4+516
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;note&gt;</span>Stojanov wrongly gives 73ff.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/note&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/measure&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/extent&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">It is possible to include links to information in the same file or outside it,
                  e.g.:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;extent&gt;</span>2 <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="EOENB146"&gt;</span>(Vienna)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span>+171 
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;note&gt;</span>f.134 is a later insertion<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/note&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="ERGB1689"&gt;</span>(Moscow)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/extent&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">This shows the location of the folia in both repositories. The <i>Codex Marianus</i> consists of 2 ff. kept in Vienna and 171 in Moscow. The
                  element <code>&lt;ref&gt;</code> adds a link to the corresponding part of the description
                     (<code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code>or <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code>).</div>
               <div class="p">An even more complicated example can be illustrated by the description of the <i>Manuilev Apostle</i>, which is now separated into six pieces
                  housed in three different libraries:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;extent unit="folia"&gt;</span>lacuna + 
    1 <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="#NBKM499"&gt;</span>(f. 3, НБКМ 499)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span> + 
    1 <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="#BAN4.5.23"&gt;</span>(BAN 4.5.23)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span> + 
    9 lacuna + 
    f. 4 + 
    lacuna + 
    f. 5 + 
    lacuna + 
    ff. 6-10 + 
    lacuna + 
    f. 11–12 <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="#NBKM499"&gt;</span>(NBKM 499)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span> + 
    lacuna + 
    1 <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="#RSLGrig15.III"&gt;</span>(Grig. 15.III, 1r/v)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span> + 
    4 <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="#BAN24.4.7"&gt;</span>(BAN 24.4.7)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span> + 
    1 <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="#RSLGrig15.III"&gt;</span>(Grig. 15.III, 2r/v)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span> + 
    lacuna + 
    1 <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="#NBKM500"&gt;</span>(NBKM 500)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span> +
    2 <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="#NBKM499"&gt;</span>(ff. 1-2, NBKM 499)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span> + 
    1 <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="#BAN4.5.24"&gt;</span>(BAN 4.5.24)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/extent&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.9.">5.9. Dimensions</h3>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.9.1.">5.9.1. General remarks</h4>
                  <div class="p">All sorts of dimensions could be entered into the element <code>&lt;dimensions&gt;</code>,
                     and the attribute <code>@type</code> gives a hint to the encoder of possible uses
                     for the element. The attribute <code>@unit</code> provides three possible values
                     and <code>@scope</code> emphasizes the range of these dimensions.</div>
                  <div class="p">The element <code>&lt;dimensions&gt;</code> could be can be used in many places where
                     measurement is requirement, and it has three special attributes for that
                     purpose. The attribute <code>@type</code> provides a common typology of the
                     dimensions of a given manuscript source. Possible values comprise all important
                     parts of the physical description and layout. Commonly used dimensions are
                     those of leaves, dimensions of the written area, and the height of the
                     characters or lines. The author of the description may, however, find it useful
                     to mention also the dimensions of the ruled or pricked region of the page and
                     quire, as well as to provide measurements for the borders. It is even possible
                     to distinguish the dimension of a single letter in comparison to the whole
                     line.</div>
                  <div class="p">The most useful units of measurement in manuscript description are
                        <dfn>mm</dfn> and <dfn>cm</dfn>, but sometimes, especially in the
                     description of initials, a measurement in lines per page or characters per line
                     (chars) could be more useful.</div>
                  <div class="p">To supply information on the possible range of dimensions, the compiler of the
                     catalogue information may find it convenient to use the attribute
                        <code>@scope</code> with the exact value of a particular part of the
                     manuscript.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.9.2.">5.9.2. Height</h4>
                  <div class="p">The height of some object given in units as part of the element
                        <code>&lt;dimensions&gt;</code>.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.9.3.">5.9.3. Width</h4>
                  <div class="p">The width of an object given in units as part of the element
                        <code>&lt;dimensions&gt;</code>.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.9.4.">5.9.4. Depth</h4>
                  <div class="p">The depth of an object given in units as part of the element
                        <code>&lt;dimensions&gt;</code>.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.9.5.">5.9.5. Example</h4>
                  <div class="p">A possible example could be:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;dimensions unit="mm" type="folia"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;height&gt;</span>205<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/height&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;width&gt;</span>140<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/width&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/dimensions&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.9.6.">5.9.6. Other dimensions</h4>
                  <div class="p">Any other dimensions can be supplied through the general-purpose element
                        <code>&lt;dim&gt;</code>. For example, in measuring binding panels:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;dimensions type="panels" unit="mm"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;height scope="all"&gt;</span>300<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/height&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;width scope="all"&gt;</span>220<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/width&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;dim type="thickness"&gt;</span>85<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/dim&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/dimensions&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.10.">5.10. Foliation and pagination</h3>
               <div class="p">Both elements have the same content and structure, and include information about
                  when the foliation or pagination was made, whether it is original, and how the
                  folia or pages are marked or numbered, as in the following example from the
                  electronic description of MS Pogodin 1204 by Antoaneta Granberg:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;foliation&gt;</span>original, from <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;date&gt;</span>1805<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/date&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/foliation&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.11.">5.11. Collation</h3>
               <div class="p">The description of collation offers three alternatives: <ul><li>to describe the general collation using the element <code>&lt;p&gt;</code> for an
                        unstructured description </li><li>to begin with a general overview using the element <code>&lt;p&gt;</code> but also to
                        describe such characteristics as signatures, catchwords, pricking, ruling or
                        dispositions of folia in the gatherings in separate elements;</li><li>when some of the quires deviate from the general rules, to describe them
                        in one or more separate <code>&lt;quire&gt;</code> elements</li></ul></div>
               <div class="p">A simple description could include the element <code>&lt;p&gt;</code> with a formula, e.g.:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;collation&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;formula&gt;</span>I (8 -i), II(8), III(8-i), IV-XIX(8), XX(4.4+2), XXI(8-8)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/formula&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;signatures&gt;</span>Gatherings signed in the <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>mid-lower margin, first recto<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ruling&gt;</span>Leaves have been ruled, though the ruling pattern is hardly 
    visible.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ruling&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/signatures&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/collation&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.11.1.">5.11.1. Signatures</h4>
                  <div class="p">An important part of the description of quires is how they are marked at their
                     beginning and/or end. The description should include a phrase defining the form
                     and place at the beginning and end of the quire, as well as any changes, e.g.:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;signatures&gt;</span>The original markings of the quires through letters is preserved<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/signatures&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.11.2.">5.11.2. Description of each quire</h4>
                  <div class="p">The element <code>&lt;quire&gt;</code> brings together all possible features for the
                     characterization of the quire, including number, composition, how and where
                     quires are marked, and with the assistance of what tool. The element
                        <code>&lt;formula&gt;</code> provides information about how the quire is composed, of
                     how many folia, etc. The content of this element is a formula. Consider the
                     following example:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;collation&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;quire n="I"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;extent&gt;</span>2<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/extent&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;formula&gt;</span>8 (-1-2-3-4-5-6)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/formula&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/quire&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;quire n="II-XXI"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;extent&gt;</span>8<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/extent&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/quire&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;quire n="XXII"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;extent&gt;</span>7<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/extent&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;formula&gt;</span>7 (-7)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/formula&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/quire&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;quire n="XXIII"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;extent&gt;</span>2<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/extent&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;formula&gt;</span>6 (-1-2-3-4) <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/formula&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/quire&gt;</span>
 … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/collation&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">This means that first quire of the manuscript was formed of 8 ff., all of
                     which, with the exception of the f. 7, are now missing. Quires II to XXI have 8
                     ff. each. From quire XXII one folio (7) is missing. The last, quire XXIII,
                     consisted originally of 6 ff. but only 2 of them (5 and 6) are preserved
                     intact.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.11.3.">5.11.3. Gregory rule or the rule of parchment arrangement in the quire</h4>
                  <div class="p">The arrangement of the parchment folia as part of the quire structure is
                     entered here. Only de visu observations can identify the sequence and order of
                     parchment folia. There are two common abbreviations: HS for the hair (dark)
                     side and FS ∏for the flesh (light) side of the parchment. Thus, the content of
                     this element could be a sequence of HS and FS abbreviations, e.g.:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;gregoryRule&gt;</span>HS|FS-FS|HS-HS|FS-FS|HS = HS|FS-FS|HS-HS|FS- FS|HS<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/gregoryRule&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">Here the sign <code>|</code> separates pages, <code>–</code> separates folia,
                     and <code>=</code> signifies the middle of the quire. In cases where there is
                     no rule, or there are deviations from it, this should be stated explicitly. If
                     the deviations are caused by the loss of leaves, it is possible to insert a
                     link pointing to the place where this loss is explained, e.g., in the content
                     of the element <code>&lt;condition&gt;</code>.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.11.4.">5.11.4. Ruling patterns and types</h4>
                  <div class="p">Two kinds of information regarding medieval manuscripts could be entered in the
                     element <code>&lt;ruling&gt;</code>. The first is related to the ruling type defined by
                     researchers such as Leroy (1976) or Gilissen (1977), who attempted to propose
                     formal, structured typologies of ruling types. In the other, information is
                     related to the place of ruling in the quire, or the so called
                        <dfn>scheme</dfn>. The former could be expressed as a formula of ruled
                     lines for writing, and the latter could be visualized as simple graphic showing
                     the places in the quire where the ruling is accomplished, e.g.:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ruling&gt;</span>&amp;gt;&amp;gt; | &amp;gt; | |&amp;lt; |&amp;lt;&amp;lt; = &amp;gt;&amp;gt;| &amp;gt;| |&amp;lt; | &amp;lt;&amp;lt;<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ruling&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">This scheme means that in this quire the ruling is made for each of the two
                     folia: once for the outer double leaf and once for the inner one (double sign:
                        <code>&gt;&gt;</code> or <code>&lt;&lt;</code>). The symbols
                        <code>&gt;</code> or <code>&lt;</code> mean that on the leaf there is just a
                     trace of the ruling made on the previous leaf. The attribute <code>@type</code>
                     should provide information about the classification scheme employed (e.g.,
                     Gillisen or Leroy).</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.11.5.">5.11.5. Prickings</h4>
                  <div class="p">Observations about prickings are relatively rare in the literature, even
                     though, as explained by Jones (1946a, 1946b), they could bear information about
                     scriptorial techniques. Thus, it is necessary to provide an element for such
                     types of information. Here is an example from DUL MS Cosin V.II.17 Anseis de
                     Carthage, Ogier le Danois (in French) s. xiii2 (<a href="http://www.dur.ac.uk/library/asc/theme/medmss/apvii17/">http://www.dur.ac.uk/library/asc/theme/medmss/apvii17/</a>) encoded
                     in Repertorium model):
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;pricking&gt;</span>Pricking in outer margins only, probably through folded quires, 
    from front to back.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/pricking&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">The following example is from the web-based electronic description of St.
                     Alban’s Psalter (<a href="http://www.abdn.ac.uk/~lib399/english/essays/codicology.shtml">http://www.abdn.ac.uk/~lib399/english/essays/codicology.shtml</a>),
                     encoded according to the Repertorium model)
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;pricking&gt;</span> Most prick marks have been trimmed off. On p 112, 6 prick marks are
    visible on the outer margin. On p 417, thirteen prick marks at 9mm intervals
    remain on the outer margin. There is no pricking on the inner
    margins.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/pricking&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.12.">5.12. The manuscript condition</h3>
               <div class="p">Information about the condition of the manuscript is entered in the element
                     <code>&lt;condition&gt;</code>. It is used mainly to describe damage to folia, quires, the
                  binding, or the whole manuscript. Traces of restoration processes could be encoded
                  in this element as well. Here is an example from the electronic description of
                  British Library Add MSS 23999 by Dilyana Radoslavova:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;condition&gt;</span>The manuscript is in good condition except for the last gathering, in
    which there is damage along the lower edge of the leaves, which have been
    repaired and the text restored in a style very close to the
    original.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/condition&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.13.">5.13. Description of the page layout</h3>
               <div class="p">This description is entered as part of the element <code>&lt;layoutDesc&gt;</code> (Burnard
                  and Bauman 2007). As in many other places in the model, you can choose between
                  unstructured description (with element <code>&lt;p&gt;</code>) or structured data in the
                  element <code>&lt;layout&gt;</code>, probably preceded by an introduction (element
                     <code>&lt;summary&gt;</code>).</div>
               <div class="p">The element <code>&lt;layout&gt;</code> has three special attributes: <code>@columns</code>,
                     <code>@writtenLines</code> and <code>@ruledLines</code>. If there are no further
                  explanations by the encoder, all the information can be supplied through these
                  attribute values:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;layoutDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;layout columns="1" writtenLines="18" ruledLines="20"/&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/layoutDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.14.">5.14. Ink</h3>
               <div class="p">Information about the ink is presented usually as a simple phrase like “brown dark
                  ink for the basic text and red ink for the headings and small initials”. However,
                  such descriptions could then be further developed in order to supply information
                  on ink composition, or its brightness or its loss of colour. A simple description
                  could be:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ink&gt;</span>Brown ink for the text and dark red for the initials<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ink&gt;</span>
</pre>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.15.">5.15. Decoration</h3>
               <div class="p">The element <code>&lt;decoDesc&gt;</code> is used to provide information about manuscript
                  illumination. There are two basic ways of using this element and its children. The
                  first is to provide general prose descriptions of the styles and art objects in
                  the codex with the help of the element <code>&lt;p&gt;</code> elements. The second is to
                  construct a thorough description of each kind of manuscript decoration in the
                  element <code>&lt;decoNote&gt;</code>, possibly preceded by some kind of introduction (in the
                  element <code>&lt;summary&gt;</code>). Under the second approach, each <code>&lt;decoNote&gt;</code> is
                  supplied with the attribute <code>@type</code> and an appropriate value, e.g.,
                     <q>miniatures</q>, <q>headpieces</q>, <q>tail-pieces</q>,
                     <q>initials</q>, <q>borders</q>, <q>line-fillers</q>,
                     <q>marginal</q>, <q>wash</q>, etc. Here we will give some examples:</div>
               <ul><li>For miniatures:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;decoDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;decoNote type="miniatures"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>Three miniatures of St. Mark, St. Luke, and St. John, crude 
          drawings in <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;colour&gt;</span>ink<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/colour&gt;</span> and <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;colour&gt;</span>pink<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/colour&gt;</span>, 
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;colour&gt;</span>green<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/colour&gt;</span> or <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;colour&gt;</span>ocher<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/colour&gt;</span> <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;term&gt;</span>washes<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/term&gt;</span>.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;list&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item xml:id="StMark"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>F. 44r<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>, St. Mark in full length,
             under arch, holding the Gospel.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item xml:id="StLuke"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>F. 77v<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>, St. Luke in full length,
             under ornamented arch.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item xml:id="StJohn"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>F. 133v<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>, St. John in full length,
             under arch. The image is stylistically different from the
             others.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/list&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/decoNote&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/decoDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></li><li>For headpieces:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;decoDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;decoNote type="headpieces"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;list&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span> f. 43, the Chapters of St. Mark’s Gospel, <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span> an
             interlaced headband with floral endings at the corners and the short
             sides of the band.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>f. 44v, the beginning of St. Mark’s Gospel<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>, an
             interlaced headband with floral endings at the corners and a central
             motif on the upper rim.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/list&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/decoNote&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/decoDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></li><li>For initials:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;decoDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;decoNote type="initials"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;label&gt;</span>Floral elements and interlaces<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/label&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;list&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>f. 44v, beginning of St. Mark’s Gospel<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span> initial 
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:lang="cu" rend="glag"&gt;</span>З <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span> with floral elements and 
             interlaces.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>f. 78r, beginning of St. Luke’s Gospel<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>initial 
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:lang="cu" rend="glag"&gt;</span>П<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span> with floral elements and 
             interlaces. 
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="../images/CodexMarianus78r.jpg"&gt;</span>Image<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/list&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/decoNote&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/decoDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></li><li>For decorations in margins:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;decoDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;decoNote type="marginals"&gt;</span>Marginal pointers of floral motifs on f. 1v, 5v,
       39r, 55v, 71v, 88r, 89r, 102r, 111v, 120r, 131r, 141r, 143r, 163r, 179v,
       198v, 213, 229r; 245v; 257v, 269v, 281r; 279r, 296r, 297r-v, 298v, 300r-v,
       301r-v, 302v, 303r, 304r, 305v, 311r-v, 312r-v, 313r, 314v; 274r - picture
       of the Holy Cross; <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/decoNote&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/decoDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></li></ul>
               <div class="p">In the last example the various appearances of floral motifs could be further
                  wrapped within the element <code>&lt;locus&gt;</code>. As can be seen in the examples above,
                  multiple occurrences of one decoration type could be encoded as a list of items,
                  each with a separate <code>@xml:id</code> attribute and a pointer to some image
                  outside the file.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.16.">5.16. Binding</h3>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.16.1.">5.16.1. General remarks</h4>
                  <div class="p">Information about binding in most of the descriptions is very brief, and
                     consists of statements like “Wooden panels covered with ornamented leathers.
                     Not original. Done probably in 16th century." In most cases this information is
                     entered in brief descriptions using the sub-element <code>&lt;p&gt;</code> of the element
                        <code>&lt;bindingDesc&gt;</code> (Burnard and Bauman 2007). The describer can supplement
                     this with further notes about the binding decoration (<code>&lt;decoDesc&gt;</code>) and
                     its recent condition (<code>&lt;condition&gt;</code>).</div>
                  <div class="p">If the encoder prefers to use a structured description, a short statement
                     should be entered in the element <code>&lt;binding&gt;</code> as value of the attribute
                        <code>@contemporary</code>, such as <q>true</q>, <q>false</q>,
                        <q>unknown</q>.</div>
                  <div class="p">The encoder can include a short statement before continuing the description of
                     the binding, or he or she can provide only this information. In the latter case
                     he or she could give information about all of the main parts of the
                     book-binding structure and decoration. For example:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;bindingDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;binding contemporary="true"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>Brocade on wooden boards, 
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;dimensions unit="mm" type="plate"&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;width&gt;</span>145<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/width&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;height&gt;</span>205<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/height&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/dimensions&gt;</span>. Two clasps. The paste-downs and first and last flyleaves 
       are backed with mauve cloth. Illumination and marginalia have suffered a 
       little from excessive trimming. The edges of the pages are gauffred and 
       gilded.Two metal bosses on the lower side of each cover.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;condition&gt;</span>Well preserved.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/condition&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/binding&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/bindingDesc&gt;</span> (from the description of British library Ms Egerton 3045 by
 Dilyana Radoslavova) 
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">All other aspects of the binding description, not covered by elements like
                        <code>&lt;decoDesc&gt;</code> or <code>&lt;condition&gt;</code>, could be entered in the element
                        <code>&lt;bindingNote&gt;</code> with different values of the attributes <code>@type</code>
                     or <code>@subtype</code>. For example, all aspects of the description of the cover
                     should be entered in the content of the element <code>&lt;bindingNote
                        type="cover"&gt;</code>. The material of the cover should be then described as
                     part of the sub-element <code>&lt;material&gt;</code>. The same is true also for other
                     parts of bookbinding, such as edges (e.g., technology, beveling of edges),
                     fly-leaves, etc. The observations in <code>&lt;fastening&gt;</code> could include how the
                     fastening is done, e.g., by peg and strap, by hook and clasp; the length or
                     width of the elements could be measured; their place(s) could be described,
                     etc. In <code>&lt;furnishing&gt;</code> the encoder should describe all the bosses, corner
                     pieces, etc. that can be observed on the binding.</div>
                  <div class="p">A description of the sewing could include the types of attachments to the
                     quires and leaves or to the main boards. A text block can be sewn through the
                     side of the leaves, e.g., through as over sewing or side sewing, etc. In
                     addition, the text block can also be sewn through the fold of the sections by
                     hand. Three different patterns are observed: sewing structure, sewing stitches,
                     and sewing pattern:</div>
                  <div class="p"><dfn>Sewing structures</dfn>: supported = parts other than thread involved in
                     the connection of the sections. Materials for support usually are: cord,
                     parchment, skin, linen tape, etc. unsupported = only sewing thread connecting
                     the sections to each other. An unsupported structure is commonly found in
                     Greek, Islamic, and Oriental books.</div>
                  <div class="p"><dfn>Sewing stitches</dfn>, which is the motion of a thread from a sewing
                     station (hole) exit to a sewing station entry. The classification could be as
                     follows:</div>
                  <ul><li>Slip: thread passes under itself</li><li>Link: thread passes under another thread</li><li>Loop: circle around a support</li><li>Lap: passes over a support</li><li>Forward: continues in the direction of progression</li><li>Reverse: continues to the previous direction of progression</li><li>Drop: moves downward</li><li>Climb: moves upward</li><li>Incline: moves diagonally</li></ul>
                  <div class="p">Sewing patterns. The main patterns are:</div>
                  <ul><li>Fold patterns: sequence of thread visible inside the fold of the section.
                        These are of two types: Continuous pattern: thread passing in and out each
                        sewing station to form a pattern; and Periodic pattern: thread skipping
                        sewing holes and leaves intervals between some of the stations.</li><li>Spine patterns: the pattern is formed by the stitches across the
                        uncovered spine of the book. Some spine patterns are: (1) Chain (formed by
                        link stitches), (2) Bridge (by span), (3) Ribs (by loop), (4) Herringbone
                        (by loop and link), (5) Steps (by lap), etc.</li></ul>
                  <div class="p">Interesting questions pertaining to the description of spines include:</div>
                  <ul><li>whether the form of the spine is rounded or flat (as an attribute
                           <code>@type</code>);</li><li>whether there are raised or smooth bands;</li><li>the process of reinforcing the spine of a sewn book after gluing-up,
                        rounding and backing, and before covering or casing-in, known as lining or
                        spine lining;</li><li>whether there are headbands, whether they are double or triple, etc.; how
                        they are connected to the board; what their colours are; what material
                        they're made from.</li></ul>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.16.2.">5.16.2. Date of binding and place where it is made</h4>
                  <div class="p">In most of the cases the binding of medieval manuscripts is latter then the
                     codex itself. Therefore the date and place of producing the binding should be
                     provided separately from the conclusions on date and place of origin of the
                     described book.
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;date certainty="likely"&gt;</span>15 century<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/date&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">Sometimes the exact date is known from a note by the copyist or book-binder. In
                     these cases a reference to the description and its edition should be made,
                     e.g.:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;date certainty="yes"&gt;</span>1667<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="note1"&gt;</span>cf. bookbinder’s
    note<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/date&gt;</span> (from Tachiaos 1981: 69–70, No 25) 
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">In this case the <code>&lt;date&gt;</code> element bears the attribute <code>@certainty</code>
                     with the value <q>yes</q> and this information is further referenced with
                     the <code>@target</code> attribute value <q>notel</q>. As in all other cases
                     with the elements <code>&lt;ref&gt;</code> or <code>&lt;ptr&gt;</code>, such an identifier must be
                     present. Another possible solution is to use in this case the element
                        <code>&lt;ptr&gt;</code> instead of <code>&lt;ref&gt;</code>. The element <code>&lt;ptr&gt;</code> is an empty
                     element and all its information is encoded with attributes. This means that we
                     would have to omit, e.g., a bookbinder’s note, yielding something like:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;date certainty="yes"&gt;</span>1667<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ptr target="note1"/&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/date&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.17.">5.17. Description of seals</h3>
               <div class="p">The description of seals attached to the manuscript follow the same model as
                  mentioned in the description of binding. The catalogue’s compiler could make a
                  short statement in form of paragraph or paragraphs (<code>&lt;p&gt;</code> or provide a
                  structured description in the form of decoration description (<code>&lt;decoNote&gt;</code>),
                  the condition of the seal(s) (<code>&lt;condition&gt;</code>) and the seal itself
                     (<code>&lt;seal&gt;</code>). The element <code>&lt;seal&gt;</code> has the same special attribute
                     <code>@contemporary</code> with the same choice of values as <code>&lt;binding&gt;</code>.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m5.18.">5.18. Description and edition of various notes</h3>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.18.1.">5.18.1. General remarks</h4>
                  <div class="p">There are several types of additional notes, some original to the manuscript,
                     that could be described in different ways. The first one, the colophon,
                     containing the name of the scribe, date and possibly place should be described
                     as part of the <code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code> as stated below. Other notes go elsewhere.
                     Some examples follow.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.18.2.">5.18.2. Description and edition of a later note as part of the <code>&lt;additions&gt;</code>
                     element</h4>
                  <div class="p">This is the most obvious place for the description of additions. The element
                        <code>&lt;additions&gt;</code> is the last part of the structure of <code>&lt;physDesc&gt;</code>
                     element. If there is just one addition, then the description and edition should
                     be ordered in the following order: <code>&lt;locus&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;name&gt;</code>,
                     <code>&lt;date&gt;</code>. The description could consist of one or more paragraphs
                        (<code>&lt;p&gt;</code>) or it could be encoded as a <code>&lt;list&gt;</code> containing two or
                     more <code>&lt;item&gt;</code> elements. If there is just one note, the structure could be
                     as follows:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;additions type="inscription"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>the place in the manuscript, e.g., f. 104r, inner margin<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;persName&gt;</span>if available<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/persName&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;date&gt;</span>if available<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/date&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;quote&gt;</span>an edition of the original text<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/quote&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;note&gt;</span>other notes and/or bibliographic reference, e.g., previous editions
          and interpretations.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/note&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/additions&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">In cases with more than one note, it might be most convenient to represent them
                     as a list of separate items:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;additions&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;list&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>front cover<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;persName type="binder"&gt;</span>Krastio Gramatik<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/persName&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;date evidence="conjecture"&gt;</span>1785<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/date&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;quote xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>сїа дамаскинъ на ст҃ого архангела повеза го
             кр(с)то граматикъ и тꙋгава беха два попа на стого архангела попъ
             Бено и Ꙋзꙋнъ попъ кр(с)то догава отиде на ст҃а гора мц҃ъ
             маїѧ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/quote&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>f. 61v<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;persName type="reader"&gt;</span>Stefan Stojanovich <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/persName&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;date evidence="internal"&gt;</span>1834<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/date&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;quote xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>Извѣстую какво на време то на Дꙋонисїа епїскопа
             ловчанскагѡ собираха ѿ патраршиꙗ та ѿ секи попъ по 43 гро(ш).
             заради да права(т) ст҃о мꙋро. ꙗже сщ҃ени(к) помажет новорожденныꙗ
             мл(д)нцы съ сегѡ ст҃аго мꙋро бывате сыни бжїꙗ, и наслдѣники
             цр(с)твїя его. 1834 марѳ. 23 г҃ѡ днꙗ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/quote&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/list&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/additions&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">The elements in both approaches should contain information about the place in
                     the manuscript, the name of the scribe and the date if they are known, as well
                     as the edition of note itself. The encoder could further provide a brief
                     statement about the marginal formula and some typologization about colophons
                     (cf. Gagova 1998; 2000).</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m5.18.3.">5.18.3. Additional notes and texts on separate manuscript folia</h4>
                  <div class="p">When there is a later note or text written on a separate folio or folia it
                     would be more convenient to represent it as a separate part of the manuscript.
                     In this case we can make a simple reference in the element <code>&lt;additions&gt;</code>:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;additions&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>A separate folio 72 inserted during the early book re-binding in 16 c.
       now forms a separate <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="MS_Part2"&gt;</span>part<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span> of the
       manuscript.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/additions&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">Then this part is fully described elsewhere in the document as part of the
                     element <code>&lt;msPart&gt;</code>.</div>
               </div>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="m6.">6. The scribe: palaeography and features of the language</h2>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m6.1.">6.1. General remarks</h3>
               <div class="p">In the Repertorium Initiative approach all data about the palaeographic and
                  linguistic aspects of the manuscripts are gathered together under the element
                     <code>&lt;scribeDesc&gt;</code>. This element represents an information level between the
                  pure physical description of the manuscript and a description of its content. As
                  elsewhere in this electronic model, both unstructured and structured approaches
                  are available. The unstructured description means entering the information only as
                  part of paragraph (<code>&lt;p&gt;</code>) elements. The structured approach involves encoding
                  information about each scribe (element <code>&lt;scribe&gt;</code>), possibly preceded by an
                  overview (element <code>&lt;summary&gt;</code>). When the second approach is adopted, the
                  first elements to be entered are the name and the place in the manuscript where
                  the scribe has written it. If the name of the scribe is not available or unknown,
                  the encoder can record that as:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;scribeDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;scribe n="1"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;name&gt;</span>Unknown<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/name&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/scribe&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/scribeDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">This information is followed by a description of palaeographic and linguistic
                  features, along with additional notes as needed.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m6.2.">6.2. Palaeographical features</h3>
               <div class="p">The analysis of the palaeographical features of the manuscript should be
                  accomplished in the element <code>&lt;palaeoCharact&gt;</code>. The content of this element is
                  a combination of paragraph (<code>&lt;p&gt;</code>) elements with other elements specific for
                  the description of palaeography. This means that the encoder may enter either
                  unstructured or structured information, and under the latter approach such
                  features as musical notation or encrypted writing can be described with
                  specialized tags. The <code>&lt;palaeoCharact&gt;</code> element has one important attribute –
                     <code>@script</code>. The value of this attribute should be short code that is
                  compatible with international standards of script designations (ISO 15924), e.g.,
                     <q>Grek</q> for Greek, <q>Cyrl</q> for Modern Cyrillic, <q>Cyrs</q>
                  for Old Cyrillic, <q>Latn</q> for Latin or <q>Glag</q> for Glagolitic
                  (http://unicode.org/iso15924/iso15924-codes.html):
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;palaeoCharact script="Glag"&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/palaeoCharact&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">A brief introduction to the palaeographical characteristics of the scribe can be
                  included in the element <code>&lt;summary&gt;</code>, e.g.:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;summary&gt;</span>Uncial script very close to the writing in Enina Apostle and Vatikana
    Palimpsest<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/summary&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m6.2.1.">6.2.1. The description of the shape of each sign (<code>&lt;palaeoNote&gt;</code>)</h4>
                  <div class="p">This optional element may be useful when the exact shape of a letter or other
                     sign is important, as in:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;palaeoNote&gt;</span>The letter <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>a<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span> is written … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/palaeoNote&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;palaeoNote&gt;</span>The letter <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>б<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span> is written … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/palaeoNote&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m6.2.2.">6.2.2. Musical notation</h4>
                  <div class="p">If musical signs are found in the manuscript, the system of their usage along
                     with the places in the manuscript where they are found are described in the
                     element <code>&lt;musicNotation&gt;</code>. The element has a special attribute
                        <code>@type</code>, which could further systematize the notation:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;musicNotation type="theta"&gt;</span>The theta-notation is used together with double
    okseia, double vareia (Piesma) and double apostrophos.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/musicNotation&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m6.2.3.">6.2.3. Cryptography</h4>
                  <div class="p">The element for the description of a cryptographic system in the Repertorium
                     model is called <code>&lt;crypto&gt;</code> and should be used in cases where encrypted
                     letters or passages of text occur. The additional attribute <code>@type</code>
                     might identify the method, e.g., simple substitution cipher:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;crypto type="simpleSubstitution"&gt;</span>а = ѳ, в = и, г = з, д = ѕ, к = п, л = о, 
    м = ѯ, р = ц, с = ѡ, т = ѱ, у = х. The other letters are used without
    substitution.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/crypto&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m6.3.">6.3. Description of the scribe’s language</h3>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m6.3.1.">6.3.1. General remarks</h4>
                  <div class="p">In the framework of Repertorium Initiative there is a clear distinction between
                     the language of the text and the language of the scribe. The language of the
                     text is understood in relation to the text history, cf. the section pertaining
                     to manuscript content. The language of the scribe or scribes may or may not be
                     related with the text history and text analysis. Therefore, a special section
                     in the manuscript description is need to allow it to be treated separately.</div>
                  <div class="p">The language of the scribe can be described as unstructured paragraph
                        (<code>&lt;p&gt;</code>)elements or as a sequence of the elements <code>&lt;orthography&gt;</code>,
                        <code>&lt;grammar&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;lexis&gt;</code>, optionally introduced by general
                     observations in the element <code>&lt;summary&gt;</code>.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m6.3.2.">6.3.2. Orthography</h4>
                  <div class="p">Encoders of Slavonic manuscripts have two possible ways to describe
                     orthographic features. The first is to provide only a brief characteristic in
                     the element <code>&lt;p&gt;</code>, e.g.:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;orthography&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>The scribe writes with two jers and with nonetymological appearance of
       juses. After the letters ш, ж, in the word-initial position (after j),
       and after the vowel letters front nasal is turned into the back one.
       After ч this change is not observed. A relatively small number of
       ligatures and supralinear signs. A few examples of accent marks
    …<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/orthography&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">The other way to describe the orthography of the scribe is with a structured
                     description, where each piece of the description is entered as a separate
                     element.</div>
                  <div>
                     <h5 id="m6.3.2.1.">6.3.2.1. The element <code>&lt;orthNote&gt;</code></h5>
                     <div class="p">The rules for the usage of different letters and signs are described as
                        content of the element <code>&lt;orthNote&gt;</code>. It contains the attributes
                           <code>@type</code> and <code>@subtype</code>, which are used to typologize the
                        orthography of the scribe in appropriate ways, especially with respect to
                        three groups of letters: jers, juses and letters for jotated vowels.</div>
                     <div>
                        <h6 id="m6.3.2.1.1.">6.3.2.1.1. The orthography of the jers</h6>
                        <div class="p">Information regarding this feature is entered in the element
                              <code>&lt;orthNote&gt;</code> with value of attribute <code>type="jer"</code>. The
                           encoder can describe the positions of jers and their relationship to the
                           etymological condition, along with examples of their usage. This element
                           has one required attribute: <code>@subtype</code>. Possible values are:</div>
                        <ul><li>front: only front jer is used</li><li>back: only back jer is used</li><li>etymReg: etymologically regular use of jers</li><li>nonEtymReg: not etymological but regular use of jers</li><li>irregular: the use of jers cannot be formalized in general
                              rules.</li></ul>
                        <div class="p">For example, manuscripts written with Tarnovo orthographic norms use both
                           jers regularly, but in a non-etymological way. The same is true for the
                           Zograph Folia from the tenth century, as in the following example:
                           <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;orthography&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;orthNote type="jer" subtype="nonEtymReg"&gt;</span>Both jers are used but jery
       is written only with front jer. There is a tendency to substitute
       back with front jer before a syllable with front vowel.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/orthNote&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/orthography&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                     </div>
                     <div>
                        <h6 id="m6.3.2.1.2.">6.3.2.1.2. The orthography of the juses</h6>
                        <div class="p">The description of the orthography of the juses is very similar to that
                           of jers, addressing the positions where juses are or are not used,
                           etymologically correct or incorrect usage, etc. The element
                              <code>&lt;orthNote&gt;</code> is used here, too, but with value <q>jus</q> of
                           the attribute <code>@type</code>. Here, the possible values of
                              <code>@subtype</code> attribute are:</div>
                        <ul><li>etymReg: etymologically regular use of juses (e.g., as in Old
                              Bulgarian)</li><li>nonEtymReg: non etymological, but otherwise regular use of the
                              juses (Middle Bulgarian manuscripts, and in part East Slavic
                              examples)</li><li>nonConsis: nonconsistent use of the juses</li><li>nonJus: orthography without juses</li><li>jusTrace: orthography without or with very few examples of the
                              juses, but with traces, e.g., manuscripts written generally with
                              non-jus orthography but with traces of the Middle Bulgarian
                              alternation of juses</li></ul>
                        <div class="p">Here is an example that combines a prose description with the use of
                           strutured attributes:
                           P<pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;orthography&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;orthNote type="jus" subtype="jusTrace"&gt;</span>The text is written with
       non-jus orthography but with some traces of Middle Bulgarian
       confusion of nasals.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/orthNote&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/orthography&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                     </div>
                     <div>
                        <h6 id="m6.3.2.1.3.">6.3.2.1.3. The orthography of the letters for jotated vowels</h6>
                        <div class="p">In many cases the distribution of jers and juses may provide enough data
                           to determine the main features of a specific medieval Slavic orthographic
                           system. To be more precise, however, the description of letters for
                           jotated vowels may also be important. This information is also part of
                           the element <code>&lt;orthNote&gt;</code> with the value <q>jotVowel</q> of the
                           attribute <code>@type</code>. For example:
                           <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;orthography&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;orthNote type="jotVowel"&gt;</span>The letters <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:id="cu"&gt;</span>є<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span> and 
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:id="cu"&gt;</span>ѥ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span> are both used in intervocalic position.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/orthNote&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/orthography&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                     </div>
                     <div>
                        <h6 id="m6.3.2.1.4.">6.3.2.1.4. The orthography of other letters or signs</h6>
                        <div class="p">The distribution of all other letters and special signs with the
                           exception of musical notation and cryptographic systems follow the model
                           as described here for jotated vowels. The same model could be used for
                           the description of non-Slavic orthographic features, as well.</div>
                     </div>
                  </div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m6.3.3.">6.3.3. Description of grammar</h4>
                  <div class="p">The description of grammatical characteristics could be divided into separate
                     units, but in this case, unlike with orthography, there may not be a standard
                     list of descriptive criteria, and the researcher has to introduce the structure
                     using the available means. Consider the following example from the electronic
                     description of <i>Codex Marianus</i> by Margaret Dimitrova,
                     Andrej Bojadžiev and Elisaveta Moussakova:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;grammar&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;list&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item xml:id="phonology"&gt;</span>Adjective forms prefer the archaic <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;m xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>-сц-<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/m&gt;</span> 
          to <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;m xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>-ст-<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/m&gt;</span>. Cases with <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;m xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>-ст-<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/m&gt;</span> are rare. 
          Uncontracted forms of pronominal adjectives and of verbs of the -je-conjugation in 
          Ind. Praes. Act. and of verbs in Imperfect are much more frequent than contracted 
          ones. Verbal forms(Ind. Praes. Act., p.3, -je-conjugation) with assimilation, such
          as <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>бѣгаат<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span>, <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>радоуоутъ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span> are frequent. In 
          Imperativus there is variation of forms with <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>ѣ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span> and with 
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>и<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span>, such as <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>покажѣте<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span> 290.17, but also 
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w lang="cu"&gt;</span>покажите<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span> 80.5.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item xml:id="verbs"&gt;</span>The manuscript uses non-sigmatic Aoristus (e.g., 
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>вьнидъ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span>, <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>сънидъ <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span>, <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>идомъ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span>, 
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>отидѫ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span>)and first sigmatic Aoristus of verbs with stems ending in a
          consonant (e.g., <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>привѣс<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span>,<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>въвѣсом<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span>, 
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>възнѣсѧ <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span>). Verbs with infinitive stems ending in a vowel often 
          preserve the archaic ending <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;m xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>-тъ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/m&gt;</span> in Ind. Aor. Act, p. 2 and 3, Sg., 
          e.g., <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>обитъ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span>, <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>оумрѣт<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span>. Three cases of omitted 
          ending <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;m xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>-тъ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/m&gt;</span> for Ind. Praes. Act., p. 3. Sg. are found 
          (<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>e<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span> instead of <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>естъ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span>, <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>нѣ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span> 
          for <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>нѣст<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span>, and <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>бѫд<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span> for 
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>бѫдет<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span>).<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item xml:id="nomina"&gt;</span>The old suffix <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;m xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>-нье<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/m&gt;</span> is written frequently as 
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;m xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>-ние<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/m&gt;</span>, e.g., <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>знамение<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span>, but this orthography 
          is not consistently followed. In other forms <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;m xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>-ье<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/m&gt;</span> is preferred 
          (cf. <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;w xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>абье<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/w&gt;</span>, 24r.20).<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/list&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/grammar&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m6.3.4.">6.3.4. Description of lexical features</h4>
                  <div class="p">Lexical features can be described similarly to grammatical ones. Whether this
                     takes the form of a list with items or of just one unit depends on the
                     encoder’s vision and the length of the material, as in the following example
                     from the electronic description of <cite>Codex Marianus</cite> by
                     Margaret Dimitrova, Andrej Bojadžiev, and Elisaveta Moussakova:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;lexis&gt;</span>The manuscript uses lexis that is believed to be typical of the earliest
    Gospel translation from Greek, cf. the use of the archaic lexemes 
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;foreign xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>баль, жаль, миса, шюи, братръ, небесьскъ, неприѣзнь, 
       пропѧти, иночѧдъ, врътъ, искрьнъ, грѣсти<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/foreign&gt;</span> could prove this hypothesis. 
    Also, in word-formation the manuscript prefers the old suffix 
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;m xml:lang="cu" type="suffix"&gt;</span>ице ѫ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/m&gt;</span> and not <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;m xml:lang="cu" type="suffix"&gt;</span>ждь<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/m&gt;</span>. 
    Still, the following forms are considered to be relatively later: 
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;foreign xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>благодать, написание, дрѧхлъ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/foreign&gt;</span>.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/lexis&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="m7.">7. The manuscript contents</h2>
            <div class="p">The description of the manuscript contents in the Repertorium electronic description
               model is distributed over two main parts, one pertaining to the manuscript as a
               single body of texts and the other to each text individually.</div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.1.">7.1. The content of the whole manuscript</h3>
               <div class="p">The content of the whole manuscript is described in the element
                     <code>&lt;msContents&gt;</code>. Nothing in this element is mandatory, but the element
                  itself is required, and the encoder might start by defining the range of texts in
                  terms of the research tradition. There are three special attributes for this
                  element. The first, <code>@type</code>, can record whether the manuscript collection
                  of texts is original (<code>@original</code>) or represents either an earlier
                  compilation or a translation. The second, <code>@style</code>, can situate the
                  manuscript within a broad typology, viz., choosing between the values
                     <q>narrative</q> and <q>non-narrative</q>. The third, <code>@class</code>,
                  can be used to provide a convenient typology for all the texts in the manuscript.
                  The usage of these three attributes with their values can be illustrated with this
                  example:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msContents class="vitas" type="translation" style="narrative"&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msContents&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">Here the basic information about all the texts in the manuscript is given. In this
                  case, the main classification of the texts falls under the category of Vitas of
                  saints that are translations and that are narrative.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.2.">7.2. Several levels of the representation of whole manuscript contents</h3>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m7.2.1.">7.2.1. Unstructured view</h4>
                  <div class="p">If we are compiling just a short description of the manuscript without
                     information about each text, the most convenient method is to use just a
                     paragraph with short information:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msContents class="NT.Gospels" type="translation" style="narrative"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>The Aprakos Evangelion is without beginning and end. It starts with the
       reading for the Saturday of the 3rd week after Lent (Mk 8:30-31),
       continues with the Sunday after the 4th week of the Lent (Mk 9:17), and
       then the reading for the Saturday of the 5th week after Lent follows.
       After that there are texts for Palm Sunday and for the Monday and Tuesday
       of Holy Week.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msContents&gt;</span> From the electronic description of MS Zogr. 282 by Andrej
 Bojadžiev 
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m7.2.2.">7.2.2. Structured view</h4>
                  <div class="p">For more elaborate cataloguing purposes it is necessary to use special elements
                     to describe the textual characteristics of the manuscript content in full.
                     These elements are:</div>
                  <ul><li><code>&lt;summary&gt;</code>: a short characteristic of all of the texts</li><li><code>&lt;titlePage&gt;</code>: the title page of the manuscript if it exists</li><li><code>&lt;title&gt;</code>: the title of the manuscript set of texts as given by the
                        research tradition</li><li><code>&lt;author&gt;</code>: the author or authors of the whole text
                        collection</li><li><code>&lt;respStmt&gt;</code>: responsibility statement – used for information about
                        the editors or translators of the collection</li><li><code>&lt;note&gt;</code>: notes about the manuscript’s texts: e.g., missing parts of
                        the collection or layout of the whole text collection</li><li><code>&lt;filiation&gt;</code>: text historical data; place of this collection in the
                        textual traditions, e.g., with respect to protograph, antigraph, apograph or
                        various sources of text compilation and/or translation</li><li><code>&lt;textLang&gt;</code>: information about the language of the text collection
                        in relation of its textual tradition (not the language of the scribe or
                        copyist)</li><li><code>&lt;sampleText&gt;</code>: a snippet of original text in the language and
                        script of the manuscript; typically includes the main manuscript heading,
                        rubric, incipit and explicit of the whole manuscript</li><li><code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code>: description of each text in the manuscript</li></ul>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.3.">7.3. A summary of the texts</h3>
               <div class="p">A summary should contain a brief phrase characterizing in some way the collection
                  of texts in the manuscript, e.g.:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;summary&gt;</span>Contains DICTIONARIVM SLAVONICOLATINUM OPERI AMBROSII CALEPINI Servata
    Verborum integra. SERIE CONFORMATUM MOSCHOVIAE. Anno 1695.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/summary&gt;</span> From the
 electronic description of BL Add. MSS 12069 by Dilyana Radoslavova
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">This summary could also contain data about the quantity of the text in the
                  manuscript, e.g.:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;summary&gt;</span>The MS contains 34 texts.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/summary&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.4.">7.4. The manuscript title page</h3>
               <div class="p">This is a very rare tradition in medieval manuscripts, and is more common in early
                  modern books. Where it occurs, it is best to encode just the main information and
                  to give a link to the image of the page:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;titlePage&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;docTitle&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;titlePart&gt;</span>The title as it appears on the title page<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/titlePart&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/docTitle&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;figure&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;figDesc&gt;</span>A description of the image<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/figDesc&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;graphic url="sometitlePage.png"&gt;</span>A link to the image<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/graphic&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/figure&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/titlePage&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.5.">7.5. The authors, editors and compilers of the text collection in the
                  manuscript</h3>
               <div class="p">In most cases manuscripts contain texts from different authors and their tradition
                  of edition and compilation could be very variable. There are, however, also
                  codices that contain more or less a fixed collection of texts by or attributed to
                  a single author. In such cases, such as the Pandects of Antiochus, Pandects of
                  Nikon of Montenegro or Chrysorrhoas collection with writings of John Chrysostom
                  (Thomson 1982; Miltenov 2010; Милтенов 2011) we can provide information about the
                  author and sometimes about the editor/compiler of the whole set of texts, as in
                  this example:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;author&gt;</span>John Chrysostom<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/author&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;respStmt&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;resp&gt;</span>Translator<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/resp&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;name&gt;</span>monk Antonij<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/name&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/respStmt&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;respStmt&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;resp&gt;</span>Compiler<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/resp&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;name&gt;</span>Vladislav Grammatik<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/name&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/respStmt&gt;</span> From the electronic description of MS Rila 3/6 by Anisava Miltenova 
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">Here we have three kinds of information: 1) about the original author of the texts
                  (John Chrysostom), 2) about the translator of his works (monk Antonij), and 3)
                  about the compiler of this miscellany (Vladislav Gramatik). All the information
                  other than authorship is contained in the element <code>&lt;respStmt&gt;</code>, which has two
                  parts: (1)<code>&lt;resp&gt;</code> (responsibility), here a brief statement in the form of
                  words as <code>editor</code>, <code>compiler</code>, <code>scribe</code>, etc.,
                  could be made, and (2) information about the person in elements <code>&lt;name&gt;</code> or
                     <code>&lt;persName&gt;</code> (personal name, cf. Burnard and Bauman 2007:
                     <code>&lt;respStmt&gt;</code>).</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.6.">7.6. A note in the description of texts</h3>
               <div class="p">The element <code>&lt;note&gt;</code> in the description of texts is restricted to cases that
                  deal with extra-textual historical features, such as missing parts of the texts:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;note&gt;</span>Most of the texts have some missing parts. Cf. Manuscript Condition <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/note&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">Here, a reference to the physical condition of the manuscript is given. In other
                  cases the element <code>&lt;note&gt;</code> could be useful to further refine the text
                  attribution of the whole codex and/or to provide bibliographic data:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;note&gt;</span>Sprostranov was the first to attribute the whole collection to the single
    compiler <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;bibl&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="../bibliography/scyr.xml#Sprostanov1902"&gt;</span>Sprostranov 
          1902: 52-56<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/bibl&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/note&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.7.">7.7. Information about text history for the whole manuscript</h3>
               <div class="p">The text historical information on the level of the whole manuscripts is part of
                  the content of the series of element <code>&lt;filiation&gt;</code>. This element has one
                  important attribute, <code>@type</code>, the most common values of which are :</div>
               <div class="p"><q>antigraph</q>: information about the text collection’s antigraph</div>
               <div class="p"><q>apograph</q>: information about the text collection’s apograph</div>
               <div class="p"><q>litRedaction</q>: information about the textual redaction or recension of
                  the whole manuscript</div>
               <div class="p"><q>protograph</q>: information about the text collection’s protograph</div>
               <div class="p"><q>source</q>: the source of the whole text collection</div>
               <div class="p"><q>translation:</q> data about the translation with respect to number and/or
                  origin.</div>
               <div class="p">Examples of usage are given below. On the level of the whole manuscript these
                  features are invoked only when conclusions can be drawn for the whole text
                  collection about a common source, protograph, literary redaction, etc.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.8.">7.8. The original text on the level of the whole manuscript</h3>
               <div class="p">Some collections of texts have a common title or heading, incipit and explicit. In
                  this cases, the element <code>&lt;sampleText&gt;</code> could be used. In all other cases the
                  element <code>&lt;sampleText&gt;</code> should be used to illustrate particular texts from the
                  manuscripts, rather than the whole body of the codex.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.9.">7.9. The characterization of each text</h3>
               <div class="p">Information about each individual text resembles closely the description of the
                  whole text collection. All features of such a description are given as part of the
                  element <code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code> (a structured manuscript item, Burnard and Bauman
                  2007: msItemStruct). This element has the same three attributes, with the same
                  functions, as <code>&lt;msContents&gt;</code>: <code>@type</code>, <code>@style</code> and
                     <code>@class</code>. In addition to these attributes it may be convenient to use
                  unique identifier for each text as part of the XML document (attribute
                     <code>@xml:id</code>), as well as perhaps <code>@defective</code> with one of the
                  values: <q>true</q>, <q>false</q>, <q>unknown</q>,
                     <q>inapplicable</q>. In the Repertorium framework the value of the
                     <code>@xml:id</code> in <code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code> is a combination of the fixed string
                     <q>ACD</q> (abbreviation for <code>Article Content Description</code>) and
                  the place number of the text in order in the manuscript. A combination of all of
                  the important attributes of <code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code> can be illustrated by this
                  hypothetical example:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct defective="false" type="compilation" style="non-narrative" xml:id="ACD1"&gt;</span>
    … 
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.10.">7.10. The text location</h3>
               <div class="p">The exact place of the text in the manuscript is given as part of the element
                     <code>&lt;locus&gt;</code>. In the Repertorium we use this element together with the
                  attribute <code>@n</code> (number) to represent the number of a text as part of a
                  whole text collection:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus n="1"&gt;</span>1r-25v<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">The contents of the element here is the exact ordinal location in the manuscript
                  where the text is to be found.</div>
               <div class="p">When the one and same text is dispersed across different parts of manuscript a
                     <code>&lt;locusGrp&gt;</code> element is used, as in this example from the electronic
                  description of MS NBKM 309 by Anisava Miltenova:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locusGrp n="7"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus n="7.1"&gt;</span>154r-155v<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus n="7.2"&gt;</span>90r-90v<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locusGrp&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">In this example the text is falsely reordered in two different places in the
                  manuscript, so that the beginning part of the text is bound after the ending part.
                  In such cases it is mandatory to give the exact order of the leaves. The attribute
                     <code>@n</code> gives here the exact number of the text (7), which is restored to
                  logical order with the help of sub-numbers (7.1 and 7.2).</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.11.">7.11. The name of the text given by the researcher</h3>
               <div class="p">In the approach of Repertorium Initiative, there is a strict distinction between
                  text supplied by the researcher (the so-called “scientific title" or "supplied
                  title") and the original title of a text as it appears in the manuscript copy.
                  Both are important, the original text because it is part of the archaeographic
                  object and the scientific title because it enables researchers to identify and
                  attribute texts consistently, even when the titles may be spelled differently in
                  different manuscripts.</div>
               <div class="p">Consider the following example:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct xml:id="ACD6" style="narrative" type="translation"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus n="6"&gt;</span>200r-203v<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;title lang="en"&gt;</span>Interpretation of the Acts of Apostles. <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/title&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;author&gt;</span>St. Hyppolitus of Rome. <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/author&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;note&gt;</span>Interpretation on the 9th Proverb: “Wisdom has built her house".<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/note&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;filiation type="source" subtype="Greek"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;bibl&gt;</span>Migne, PG 10, col.
          952-953<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/bibl&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/filiation&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;filiation type="translation"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;num&gt;</span>1?<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/num&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/filiation&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;filiation type="protograph"&gt;</span>Bulgarian<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/filiation&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">If the title were just transferred automatically from the original text of the
                  manuscript, the text would read “About the 12 Apostles. Where each of them
                  preached". Such a title would not make it possible to identify other copies of the
                  same text, where the heading in those other manuscripts will probably be
                  different, and it would also not be possible to compare this text with its Greek
                  source. In this case the element <code>&lt;title&gt;</code> should provide a standardized
                  title that is compatible with other Slavonic and non-Slavonic traditions.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.12.">7.12. The author of the text</h3>
               <div class="p">The name of the author of the text is given as content of the element
                     <code>&lt;author&gt;</code>. This element contains the name of the author of the text as
                  attributed by the encoder, and it may not agree with the name of an alleged author
                  included in the manuscript itself. The usage of this element and as well as the
                  element <code>&lt;respStmt&gt;</code> is exactly as the illustrated as part of the element
                     <code>&lt;msContents&gt;</code> above.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.13.">7.13. Special data related to the text</h3>
               <div class="p">Data about the text not directly related to the text tradition but nonetheless
                  important for a full description may be encoded as part of the content of the
                  element <code>&lt;note&gt;</code> inside <code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code>. In the example given above,
                  the content of this element is:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;note&gt;</span>Interpretation on the 9th Proverb: “Wisdom has built her house"<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/note&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">In this example, the element’s content explains the title given by the researcher.
                  Without the knowledge that this fragment is part of a larger text, which has its
                  own tradition, it would be impossible to undertake further steps in the
                  investigation. This element may also be used to explain text losses and
                  interpolations, which may provide keys to understanding the textual tradition.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.14.">7.14. Dates for texts sung or read on particular occasions</h3>
               <div class="p">As part of the same element <code>&lt;note&gt;</code> inside the <code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code> element
                  we could enter fixed or movable dates presented in the manuscript copy or known by
                  the encoder in comparison with other sources. Consider the following example:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;title xml:lang="en"&gt;</span>Vita of John the Hesychast<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/title&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;note place="inline"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;date when="--03-31" type="church" evidence="internal" subtype="fixed"&gt;</span>31st of
       March<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/date&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/note&gt;</span> From the electronic description of the Codex Suprasliensis by Maya
 Petrova-Taneva 
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">Here we have all possible information about this date in the
                  <cite>Codex
                     Suprasliensis</cite>. The
                  commemoration of St. John the Hesychast in this manuscript is on March 31,
                  formalized as <code>03-31</code>. The date is used in the church calendar
                     (<code>type="church"</code>), it is presented in the manuscript (internal,
                  i.e., not supplied or conjectured by the encoder) and is part of the
                     <dfn>fixed</dfn> (<dfn>non-movable</dfn>) feast days.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.15.">7.15. The language of the text</h3>
               <div class="p">Unlike the element <code>&lt;scribeLang&gt;</code>, which is intended to give information
                  about the language of the scribe and of the manuscript parts, <code>&lt;textLang&gt;</code>
                  can provide material for the linguistic analysis of the textological features of a
                  particular text.</div>
               <div class="p">Consider the example:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;textLang&gt;</span>Only in this text we could find the older forms of the stemmatic
    Aoristus … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/textLang&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">This observation could lead to closer comparison of this text with other parts of
                  the contents, and may help determine whether its origin is different from
                  theirs.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.16.">7.16. The text source</h3>
               <div class="p">Usually the source in the Slavonic tradition is a Greek or Latin original text
                  that served as the source of translation. In the example above the excerpt:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;filiation type="source" subtype="Greek"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;bibl&gt;</span>Migne, PG 10, col.
    952-953<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/bibl&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/filiation&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">does not mean that the given text is a direct source for the translation, but that
                  it is cited as a parallel to the Slavic text in the described manuscript.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.17.">7.17. The text translation</h3>
               <div class="p">If the text is translated from other sources, then in the element
                     <code>&lt;filiation&gt;</code> with the attribute <code>@type</code> bearing value
                     <q>translation</q> the encoder may enter information about the translation,
                  e.g., the number of the translation and the place. A question mark can be used to
                  indicate uncertainty, e.g.:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;filiation type="translation"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;num&gt;</span>1?<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/num&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/filiation&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.18.">7.18. Special parts for textual criticism</h3>
               <div class="p">As with the description of the whole manuscript content, at least four values
                  could be given for <code>@type</code> in the element <code>&lt;filiation&gt;</code>:
                     <q>protograph</q>, <q>antigraph</q>, <q>apograph</q>, and
                     <q>litRedaction</q>. These elements can provide a context for researching
                  the transmission of the text by situating it within the larger tradition. Here is
                  an example from the electronic description of the <i>Manuilev
                     Apostle</i> by Margaret Dimitrova, Andrej Bojadžiev, and Elisaveta Moussakova:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;filiation type="litRedaction"&gt;</span>The manuscript uses archaic lexis and is considered
    to belong to the archaic group of Apostoloi representing the Cyrillo-Methodian
    translation. See <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;bibl&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref&gt;</span>Воскресенский 1879: 111-
    112<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/bibl&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/filiation&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">A combination of several <code>&lt;filiation&gt;</code> elements with different values of
                     <code>@type</code> can specify the exact place of a text copy, as in this example:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;filiation type="protograph"&gt;</span>Bulgarian<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/filiation&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;filiation type="antigraph"&gt;</span>Middle Bulgarian<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/filiation&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;filiation type="litRedaction"&gt;</span>2<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/filiation&gt;</span> From the electronic description of MS
 Odessa, State Library 1/112 by Anisava Miltenova 
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.19.">7.19. The text location and textual criticism</h3>
               <div class="p">A comparison of different copies of one and the same text may lead to interesting
                  results. For example MS NBKM 309 and MS Slav. Dujčev 17 share almost the same
                  content, the latter manuscript being the copy of the former. During restoration
                  the content of the MS NBKM 309 was rearranged, leading to disordered folia. As a
                  result the content of both is now best described by comparison (Милтенова 1989).
                  In the process of electronic cataloguing the contents of the both manuscripts have
                  been reconstructed as part of the process of identifying a possible common
                  ancestor. In electronic form this task could be fulfilled by attribute values in
                  elements <code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;locus&gt;</code>. In both manuscript descriptions
                     <code>@xml:id</code> begins with value <q>ACD1</q>. However, the values of the
                  attribute <code>@n</code> on the element <code>&lt;locus&gt;</code> differ. The first text in MS
                  NBKM 309 is:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct xml:id="ACD1" type="translation"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus n="3"&gt;</span>109r-110r<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;title&gt;</span>Calendologion<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/title&gt;</span> …<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">The same text in the description of Slav Dujčev 17 has the same number in
                     <code>&lt;locus&gt;</code> but comes in the second place:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct xml:id="ACD2" type="translation"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus n="3"&gt;</span>3v-6v<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;title&gt;</span>Calendologion<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/title&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">One text is missing in MS NBKM 309 but it is present in Dujčev 17, where it bears
                  a designation number 2:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct xml:id="ACD1" type="translation"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus n="2"&gt;</span>2r-3v<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;title xml:lang="bg"&gt;</span>Thunder book according to ascending and descending
       moon<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/title&gt;</span>
    … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span> From the electronic descriptions of MSS NBKM 309 and Slav.
 Dujčev 17 by Anisava Miltenova 
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">In both manuscripts the first item from the reconstructed cycle is missing, and
                  therefore an element <code>&lt;locus&gt;</code> with <code>n="1"</code> is absent as well.</div>
               <div class="p">Thus, we can have three different points of view about the place of a particular
                  text: 1) as part of the manuscript; 2) as part of the content shared with another
                  manuscript, and 3) as part of the reconstructed cycle of texts.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.20.">7.20. Decorations for a particular text</h3>
               <div class="p">In principle decorations should be described as part of <code>&lt;physDesc&gt;</code>. In some
                  cases, however, parts of the cataloguing could be entered as the element
                     <code>&lt;decoDesc&gt;</code> and with the same XML content as <code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code>. This
                  could be especially convenient in cases when the manuscript copy is compared with
                  other copies of the same text, which could lead to conclusions about specific text
                  formation and layout.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.21.">7.21. Description and edition of the colophon</h3>
               <div class="p">Unlike later or non-genuine inscriptions and notes, a colophon is considered part
                  of the genuine content of the manuscript. As such it is part of the
                     <code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code> element and its description shares the same features as
                  other text. The only exception to this rule is that the text of the colophon is
                  entered as a special element <code>&lt;colophon&gt;</code>:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct defective="false" type="original" style="narrative" xml:id="ACD15"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus n="15"&gt;</span>77v<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;author&gt;</span>Vladislav Gramatik<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/author&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;colophon xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>Исписа се сиа книга у Нагоричину Младо(м). въ дому
       Николѣ спа(н)чевикꙗ. и поче се писати, м(с)ца ноемвриꙗ. въ к҃а. дн҃ь. на
       въведение прꙗчистые бц҃е въ ст҃аа сты(х). и дописа се тогож(д)е м(с)ца
       ное(м). в гредущее лѣто. а҃і. днь. у пе(к). дне(м). Въ лѣто ҂ѕц҃ѯе.
       Владислав диак писа книгу сию. ѿ новога брьда. <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/colophon&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span> From the electronic description of MS Rila 3/6 by Anisava
 Miltenova 
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">Sometimes a manuscript contains more than one authentic scribal colophons. In this
                  case all are described and edited in the corresponding places of the description:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct type="original" xml:id="ACD6" class="colophon"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>f. 154v<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;author&gt;</span>Nikita<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/author&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;note place="inline"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;date evidence="conjecture"&gt;</span>1640<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/date&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/note&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;colophon&gt;</span>+ Изволенїемъ оц҃а и поспѣшенїе(м) сн҄а и съвръшенїемь ст҃го дх҃а
       аминъ. исписа(х) азъ многогрѣшныи никіта сїю книгꙋ. слѡ(в) мита(р) и
       фарисеꙗ. и слово въ не(д)лю о блꙋднемъ. и слово въ не(д)лю месопꙋ(с)н҃ о
       скончани мира. и слово о изгнани адамовѣ. и ѱалми избранїи. и слово о
       чс҃тнѣмъ дрѣвѣ. и кꙋпї ю пет҆кѡ велковъ. да работи за еговꙋ дш҃ꙋ и за
       родители его. велка и мт҃ри его не(д)ли. и приложи ю оу ст҃го арх҃аггла. оу
       махала сръбска ꙋ етрополе, бъ҃ да прости. <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/colophon&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct xml:id="ACD10" type="original" class="colophon"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>f. 203r<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;author&gt;</span>Daniil of Etropole<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/author&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;note&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;date evidence="internal"&gt;</span>1640<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/date&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/note&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;colophon&gt;</span>+ Изволенїемъ оц҃а и поспѣшенїе(м) сн҃а и съвръшенї;е(м) ст҃го дх҃а,
       аминъ. исписа(х) азъ еромона(х) данїи(л) сїю книгꙋ. и кꙋпї ю жива(н) ѿ село
       етрополѥ и приложи ю ꙋ ст҃го архаг҃гла михаила. оу цк҃вꙋ махала сръбска. да
       слꙋжи(т) за неговꙋ дш҃ꙋ и за подрꙋжїe егово дафинꙋ докле трае. и кои се ще
       покꙋси да ю извадить из црк҃вꙋ или да ю посвоить. да бꙋде(т) проклеть ѿ г҃а
       ба҃ и ѿ прч(с)тꙋю его мт҃еры и ѿ т҃иї бг҃оносны(х) ѿц҃ъ. при цара тꙋрска
       сꙋлтань ибрахи(м). и при еп(с)кпа ловечка кꙋ(р) сꙋмеѡна. въ лѣто ѿ адама.
       зрм҃и <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/colophon&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span> From the electronic description of MS NBKM 1388 by Dilyana
 Radoslavova 
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">The description and edition of the colophon could include data about the formula
                  of the text in terms of diplomatic structures, e.g., the form and parts of
                     <dfn>protocollo</dfn>, <dfn>testo</dfn>, <dfn>eschatollo</dfn>:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;formula&gt;</span>protocollo(invocatio)+ …<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/formula&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">Then in the text the various parts could be encoded with the help of the element
                     <code>&lt;seg&gt;</code> with a corresponding value of the attribute <code>@type</code>:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;colophon&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;seg type="protocollo"&gt;</span>+ Изволенїемъ оц҃а и поспѣшенїе(м) сн҄а и съвръшенїемь
       ст҃го дх҃а аминъ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/seg&gt;</span> …<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/colophon&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.22.">7.22. The original text from the manuscript</h3>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m7.22.1.">7.22.1. Headings, incipita and explicita as part of text descriptions</h4>
                  <div class="p">The Repertorium uses a special element <code>&lt;sampleText&gt;</code> as a wrapper around
                     several elements used for the identification of text items in a manuscript. Its
                     function is to make a distinction between the language of the description
                     (metadata used to describe the manuscript) and the original text. The element
                     itself uses one global TEI attribute, <code>@xml:lang</code>, which represents the
                     language of the content, and for medieval Slavonic codices its value is almost
                     always <q>cu</q>. The optional attribute <code>@script</code> commonly
                     contains the value <q>Cyrs</q>(for old Cyrillic) or <q>Glag</q> (for
                     Glagolitic). The following example is from the electronic description of MS
                     NBKM 1039 by Desislava Atanasova:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sampleText xml:lang="cu" script="Cyrs"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;head&gt;</span>Mсц҃а тогожде · е҃· дн҃ь · словѡ · ѡ рождьствѣ іѡана прт҃че и ѡ
       оумрьтїоу ѡц҃а его захарїе ѡч҃е бл҃сви ·<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/head&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;incipit&gt;</span>Вь лѣто четврьтодесетноѥ црс҃твоующоу иродоу вьзысканиѥ сьтвори
       изьбити млд҃нце, иже вь іерс҃лимѣ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/incipit&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;explicit&gt;</span>.црс҃твова же архела ѳ҃ лѣт҃ испльнь. вь нас же црс҃твоующоу бо҃у
       нашемоу ісо҃у хс҃оу· емоу же слав(а) сь ѡц҃емь и сь ст҃мь дх҃омь нн҃ꙗ и
       присно и в вѣкы вѣкѡм(ь) аминь.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/explicit&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sampleText&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m7.22.2.">7.22.2. Samples from the original text of the manuscript</h4>
                  <div class="p">In some older catalogues there is a special section that contains a sample of
                     the manuscript text. When creating an electronic version of such materials,
                        <code>&lt;sampleText&gt;</code> is an convenient way to preserved these text
                     examples.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m7.22.3.">7.22.3. Edition of rare or unedited texts</h4>
                  <div class="p">In some manuscripts there may be texts that are rare or perhaps completely
                     unknown to researchers, and the edition of such texts in the description of a
                     manuscript could serve as a preliminary publication. In such cases an element
                        <code>&lt;div&gt;</code> (division, Burnard and Bauman 2007: div) should be used with an
                     appropriate value in the attribute <code>@xml:lang</code>.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m7.22.4.">7.22.4. Original texts in other parts of the electronic description</h4>
                  <div class="p">Other parts of the description might also include examples and citations from
                     the manuscript source. These could be entered in two ways:</div>
                  <ul><li>As part of the content of the element <code>&lt;foreign&gt;</code> with an
                        appropriate value in element <code>@xml:lang</code>. In this case
                           <code>&lt;foreign&gt;</code> means in a different language in comparison to the rest
                        of the text.</li><li>As part of a linguistic segmentation model. In the TEI framework it is
                        possible to choose among the elements <code>&lt;c&gt;</code> (character), <code>&lt;cl&gt;</code>
                        (grammatical clause), <code>&lt;m&gt;</code> (grammatical morpheme), <code>&lt;pc&gt;</code>
                        (punctuation character), <code>&lt;phr&gt;</code> (grammatical phrase), <code>&lt;s&gt;</code>
                        (sentence-like text division), <code>&lt;seg&gt;</code> (arbitrary segmentation) or
                           <code>&lt;w&gt;</code> (grammatical word), cf. Burnard and Bauman 2007:
                           <code>model.segLike</code>. As with the elements <code>&lt;sampleText&gt;</code> and
                           <code>&lt;foreign&gt;</code>, these should all have attribute <code>@xml:lang</code>
                        with the corresponding value.</li></ul>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.23.">7.23. Bibliographic references in <code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code></h3>
               <div class="p">The last element in the content of <code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code> is for bibliographic
                  references, which are restricted to the attribution of text and its edition. They
                  come in two variants: 1) one bibliographic reference in the element <code>&lt;bibl&gt;</code>,
                  or 2) a list of more than one reference (element <code>&lt;listBibl&gt;</code>). In the
                  framework of the Repertorium project all bibliographic references for all
                  manuscript descriptions are gathered in one place, and the XML files that contain
                  the descriptions of the individual manuscript hold only pointers to these external
                  reference lists. These pointers could look like the following:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;bibl&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="../bibliography/i.xml#IvanovJ1932"&gt;</span>Иванов 1932<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/bibl&gt;</span>
</pre>
                  or
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;listBibl&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;bibl&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="blah-blah.org"/&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/bibl&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;bibl&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="blah-blah.org"/&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/bibl&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;!-- Here more bibliographic references --&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/listBibl&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m7.24.">7.24. Description of texts with complicated structure</h3>
               <div class="p">There are many texts in the medieval tradition that are composed, in turn, from
                  other texts or text parts, and the Repertorium model, building on TEI, provides a
                  method for describing such texts as part of the larger ones. This task could be
                  accomplished by nesting <code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code> inside another <code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code>
                  element, as in the following example from the electronic description of MS Pant.
                  monastery, Mount Athos 22 by Ana Stojkova :
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</span>…<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</span>…<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">The elements can be synchronized as in this example:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct xml:id="ACD15"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus n="15"&gt;</span>283r-311v<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;title xml:lang="bg"&gt;</span>Физиолог<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/title&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;title xml:lang="la"&gt;</span>Physiologus<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/title&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;note place="inline"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;bibl&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="../bibliography/scyr.xml#StojkovaA1994"&gt;</span>Стойкова 1994<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/bibl&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;bibl&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="../bibliography/acyr.xml#AleksandrovA1893"&gt;</span>Александров 1893<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/bibl&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/note&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;filiation type="protograph"&gt;</span>Bulgarian<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/filiation&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;filiation type="redaction"&gt;</span>Pseudo-Basil’s<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/filiation&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sampleText xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;head&gt;</span>Начело ес҃ствословнику имѣѥ изьѡбличенїа скотѡмь животныимь<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/head&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;explicit&gt;</span>Тако вь неприлежанїи ходеще ниже мл҃твою. ниже бдѣнїемь
          вьспоминають чеда своꙗ. ѡбнемагающе б҃жїю помощь о грѣсѣх ихь.
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/explicit&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sampleText&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct xml:id="ACD15.1"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;title xml:lang="bg"&gt;</span>За лъва<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/title&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;title xml:lang="en"&gt;</span>About the Lion<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/title&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sampleText xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;head&gt;</span>Прьвое ѡ львѣ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/head&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;incipit&gt;</span>Начнѣмь рещи ѡ львѣ ц҃рѣ звѣремь. іеже какѡвь скоть іесть. ибо
             Іаковь бл҃влаше Іоудоу гл҃ааше. скѵмень львовь.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/incipit&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sampleText&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span>
    … 
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">In this example the main text is called <q>Physiologus</q> and
                  it contains more than forty small stories. The first one is
                  <q>About the lion</q>. The numbers and identifiers are set in
                  such a way that it is possible from their value to see the text hierarchy (cf.
                  values ACD15 and ACD15.1). Every text could have its own standardized title, as
                  given by the research tradition, along with its own incipit and/or explicit, as
                  found in the manuscript (cf. also Стойкова 2011).</div>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="m8.">8. The history of the manuscript</h2>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m8.1.">8.1. General remarks</h3>
               <div class="p">The location of the manuscript date and place in the description differs across
                  descriptive models. The deviations are caused not by the particular research
                  culture (e.g., Byzantine Greek, Slavonic, Latin, Armenian, Georgian, or Hebrew),
                  but, rather, by the more general assumptions of local traditions. Very often the
                  date of a manuscript is represented as part of the heading of the description,
                  together with the place of origin and its name. In the Repertorium framework
                  historical information about a manuscript is unified within the element
                     <code>&lt;history&gt;</code>.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m8.2.">8.2. Date and place of origin of the manuscript</h3>
               <div class="p">This element could contain a short overview of the history of the manuscript in
                  the form of one or more paragraphs (element <code>&lt;p&gt;</code>) or it could contain a
                  structured description of its origin, provenance and acquisition in a library or
                  archive, possibly introduced by some kind of summary (element <code>&lt;summary&gt;</code>).
                  The original date and place of the manuscript are containing in the element
                     <code>&lt;origin&gt;</code>, as in the following example from the electronic description of
                  MS NBKM 78 by Dilyana Radoslavova:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origin&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origDate evidence="internal" cert="high"&gt;</span>1658<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/origDate&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origPlace evidence="internal" cert="high"&gt;</span>Etropole<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/origPlace&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/origin&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">In this example the elements <code>&lt;origDate&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;origPlace&gt;</code> both have
                  attributes <code>@evidence</code> and <code>@cert</code> (certainty). The value
                     <q>internal</q> means that the we know from the manuscript about the date
                  and place of origin. Additionally we can provide the attribute <code>@cert</code>
                  with a value such as, for example, <q>high</q>, which means that we believe
                  that the data in manuscript is the true one. Other possible values of
                     <code>@cert</code> are <q>low</q>, <q>medium</q> or
                  <q>unknown</q>.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m8.3.">8.3. Notes and additional materials about the history of the manuscript’s possession
                  and acquisition</h3>
               <div class="p">Notes representing data about manuscript possession and acquisition, as well its
                  edition, should be encoded as part of the manuscript history in the element
                     <code>&lt;accMat&gt;</code> (accompanying material, Burnard and Bauman 2007:
                     <code>&lt;accMat&gt;</code>). This can be seen in the the following example from the
                  electronic description of MS British Library Add. MSS 43508 by Dilyana
                  Radoslavova:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;history&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;accMat&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>Consist of notes, one dated 1926, by <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;persName&gt;</span>François Dimitry de
             Rochefort<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/persName&gt;</span>, alias <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;persName&gt;</span>Dimitrij Adol’fovič<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/persName&gt;</span>,
          indicating his relationship to the Oznobišin family and saying what the
          MS is.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/accMat&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/history&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m8.4.">8.4. Provenance</h3>
               <div class="p">All facts concerning the provenance of the codex are described as part of the
                  element <code>&lt;provenance&gt;</code>. In this element it is possible to encode all names
                  and dates as one and more sentences, as in the following example from the
                  electronic description of British Library Sloane MS 2910b by Dilyana Radoslavova:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;provenance&gt;</span>The MS belonged to <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;persName type="owner"&gt;</span>Engelbert
    Kämpfer<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/persName&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/provenance&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">This part of description should provide all facts and events prior to the
                  manuscript’s acquisition in the library or archive (Burnard and Bauman 2007:
                     <code>&lt;provenance&gt;</code>).</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m8.5.">8.5. Acquisition</h3>
               <div class="p">This element documents the way an archived item entered a particular library or
                  collection, together with a possible reference to the sources, as in the following
                  example from the electronic description of British Library Harley Ms 3519 by
                  Dilyana Radoslavova:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;acquisition&gt;</span>Purchased by <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;persName&gt;</span>Harley<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/persName&gt;</span> from <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;persName&gt;</span>Richard
       Jones<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/persName&gt;</span>, bookseller, in 1715 
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;bibl&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref target="bibliography/w.xml#WrightCE1966"&gt;</span>Wright (1966)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/bibl&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/acquisition&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="m9.">9. Additional information in the description</h2>
            <div class="p">This final part of the electronic manuscript catalogue contains:</div>
            <ul><li>administrative information about the description and manuscript custody</li><li>facts about copies of the manuscript</li><li>a bibliographic list of known publications of or about the manuscript</li></ul>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m9.1.">9.1. Administrative information</h3>
               <div class="p">The administrative information in this model consists of a recording of changes in
                  the electronic description (<code>&lt;recordHist&gt;</code>), a statement of the manuscript’s
                  availability (<code>&lt;availability&gt;</code>), a sketch of custodial events
                     (<code>&lt;custodialHist&gt;</code>), and optional extra or complementary data
                     (<code>&lt;note&gt;</code>).</div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m9.1.1.">9.1.1. Recording the history of the electronic description</h4>
                  <div class="p">The element <code>&lt;recordHist&gt;</code> can be used to document all changes in the
                     electronic description. In this element, as elsewhere in the TEI, the encoder
                     has two ways to submit data – as one or more paragraphs (<code>&lt;p&gt;</code>) or as a
                     sequence of specialized elements, which in this case are <code>&lt;source&gt;</code> and
                        <code>&lt;change&gt;</code>. The <code>&lt;source&gt;</code> is not repeatable, but because there
                     could be many changes in the electronic description, <code>&lt;change&gt;</code> is
                     optional and repeatable. For example:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;recordHist&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;source&gt;</span>Derived from the second volume of Benjo Tsonev’s description of
       manuscripts in the Sofia National library<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/source&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;change when="2012-02-02"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;name&gt;</span>Andrej Bojadžiev<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/name&gt;</span> changed the
       electronic description to reflect the last modifications in the
       model<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/change&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/recordHist&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m9.1.2.">9.1.2. Availability of the manuscript</h4>
                  <div class="p">Unlike the element <code>&lt;availability&gt;</code> as part of the <code>&lt;teiHeader&gt;</code> (cf.
                     below), the appearance of this element in the context of administrative
                     information refers to the availability of the manuscript itself. In most of the
                     cases access to the archival collection is restricted, which is reflected in an
                     entry like the following:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;availability&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>Restricted. Used by permission and by appointment with the curator<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/availability&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">The encoder might wish to consult the archive itself for the appropriate
                     formulation of rules for access to the manuscript.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m9.1.3.">9.1.3. Custodial facts</h4>
                  <div class="p">Here too, the encoder has two ways to submit data – as one or more paragraphs
                        (<code>&lt;p&gt;</code>) or as one or more <code>&lt;custEvent&gt;</code> (custodial event, Burnard
                     and Bauman 2007) elements. This element might include facts about restoration,
                     conservation of the manuscript, participation in exhibitions, etc., e.g.:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;custodialHist&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;custEvent type="exhibition" from="2011-05-11" to="2011-06-11"&gt;</span>Part of the
       exhibition “Slavic Manuscripts from the Historical Museum in
       Kjustendil"<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/custEvent&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/custodialHist&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">Every event in the history of the manuscript can be encoded as a separate
                        <code>&lt;custEvent&gt;</code> element containing the attribute <code>@type</code>, which
                     further specifies its kind. The attributes <code>@from</code> and <code>@to</code>
                     give information about the date span.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m9.1.4.">9.1.4. The note in the administrative information</h4>
                  <div class="p">Other data that cannot be formalized in advance could become part of the
                     element <code>&lt;note&gt;</code> as part of the administrative information
                        (<code>&lt;adminInfo&gt;</code>).</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m9.1.5.">9.1.5. Copies of the manuscript</h4>
                  <div class="p">Information about various known copies of the manuscript and their
                     characteristics are encoded as part of the element <code>&lt;surrogates&gt;</code>.
                     Consider the following example:
                     <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;surrogates&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;label&gt;</span>Microform<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/label&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno&gt;</span>Central Library of BAS, MF-11<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;label&gt;</span>Digital images<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/label&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;list&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>f. 184<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="file"&gt;</span>C5246-07<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>188<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="file"&gt;</span>C5247-07<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span> …
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/list&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/surrogates&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
                  <div class="p">Some manuscript may have multiple copies. This information is recorded as a
                     list of items, each of which has information about the place in the manuscript
                     the picture is taken from and identifying information about the file and its
                     name.</div>
               </div>
               <div>
                  <h4 id="m9.1.6.">9.1.6. A bibliographical list</h4>
                  <div class="p">The last item in the electronic manuscript description is a compiled
                     bibliographic list of references. This reference list should include only
                     publications about the described manuscript, such as earlier descriptions or
                     editions or special research related to the palaeographic, codicological, text
                     historical or linguistic features of the manuscript. All other types of
                     bibliographic references should be mentioned in the appropriate places in the
                     description.</div>
               </div>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="m10.">10. Encoding parts of the manuscript</h2>
            <div class="p">The element <code>&lt;msPart&gt;</code> (i.e. manuscript part) should be used in the cases when
               the manuscript is a) a convolute; b) a palimpsest, c) a supplemental physically
               different part in the manuscript or d) a supplemental and additionally written
               literary part of the manuscript. Several cases can be distinguished:</div>
            <ul><li>When the codex is re-bound and later end leaves and paste-downs are inserted by
                  the rebinding process this information should be entered in the corresponding
                  sections of the element <code>&lt;binding&gt;</code>;</li><li>The same is true in cases when the parchment or paper is reinforced as part of
                  the rebinding process.</li><li>However, when a later leaf or leaves is inserted in order to supplement the
                  text and this part is obviously different, the element <code>&lt;msPart&gt;</code> should be
                  used to describe the codicological, palaeographic, language and text features of
                  this inserted part.</li><li>The element <code>&lt;msPart&gt;</code> is not used to distinguish parts of the text
                  written by the particular scribes. This information is part of the element
                     <code>&lt;scribe&gt;</code> and its sub-elements.</li><li>The element <code>&lt;msPart&gt;</code> is not used when the manuscript is currently kept
                  in various repositories or in one repository under different shelfmarks. This
                  information is entered in element <code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code> and its sub-element
                     <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code>.</li></ul>
            <div class="p">The element <code>&lt;msPart&gt;</code> consists of the same elements for identification and the
               description of physical features, language, palaeography and text as mentioned above
               for an entire manuscript.</div>
            <div class="p">The identification part has several variants:</div>
            <ul><li>With the element <code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code> – usage should be restricted to cases
                  where the physically different part of the manuscript is kept in another
                  repository or within the same repository but under a different shelfmark.</li><li>With the element <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code> – could be used to mention a special
                  name of the manuscript part, e.g., in the case of palimpsests.</li><li>The most obvious and convenient way to describe physically distinct part of the
                  manuscript is to use the elements <code>&lt;locus&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;locusGrp&gt;</code>.</li></ul>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m10.1.">10.1. Description of palimpsests</h3>
               <div class="p">The description consists of a common cataloguing part and two or more
                     <code>&lt;msPart&gt;</code> elements, as in this example:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</span> … Here comes the common information for all parts, e.g.,
       country, repository, shelfmark, etc. <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;physDesc&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;objectDesc form="codex"&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;supportDesc material="parchment"&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>The manuscript is a palimpsest consisting of … parts<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;!-- Common data about the both parts --&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/supportDesc&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/objectDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/physDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msPart n="1" type="upperLayer"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="laterPart"&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName&gt;</span>e.g., Boyana Gospel<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;physDesc&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/physDesc&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;scribeDesc&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/scribeDesc&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msContents&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msContents&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;history&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origin&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origDate/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origPlace/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/origin&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/history&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;additional&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/additional&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msPart&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msPart n="2" type="palimpsest"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msName&gt;</span>e.g., Boyana Palimpsest<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msName&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;physDesc/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;scribeDesc&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/scribeDesc&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msContents&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msContents&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;history&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origin&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origDate/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origPlace/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/origin&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;additional/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/history&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msPart&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">Somewhere at the beginning of the physical description should be a short statement
                  about the fact that the manuscript in question is a palimpsest. Sections about
                  manuscript cataloguing, history, etc. are almost always common for all data with
                  one exception: the original dates of writing and places of origin differ, and this
                  information should be provided explicitly. In cases involving restoration and
                  references there could be a need for additional data sets. Parts are further
                  specified with the help of <code>@type</code>.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m10.2.">10.2. Description of convolutes</h3>
               <div class="p">From the point of view of electronic encoding there is not much difference between
                  palimpsests and convolutes, even though, unlike palimpsests, convolutes can be
                  formed from paper and are defined not in terms of layers, but as a horizontal
                  sequence of parts. For example:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</span> … Here comes the common information for all parts, e.g.,
       country, repository, shelfmark, etc. <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msIdentifier&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;physDesc&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;objectDesc form="codex"&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;supportDesc material="parchment"&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>The manuscript is a convolute consisting of … parts<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;!-- Common data about the both parts --&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/supportDesc&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/objectDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/physDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msPart n="1" type="original"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;physDesc&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/physDesc&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;scribeDesc&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/scribeDesc&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msContents&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msContents&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;history&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origin&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origDate/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origPlace/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/origin&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/history&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;additional&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/additional&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msPart&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msPart n="2" type="convoluted"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;physDesc/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;scribeDesc&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/scribeDesc&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msContents&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msContents&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;history&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origin&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origDate/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origPlace/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/origin&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;additional/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/history&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msPart&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">In principle, convolutes do not require special manuscript names or shelfmarks.
                  They do, however, require a special section pointing to the place(s) where the
                  parts are to be found. In the example above the element <code>&lt;locus&gt;</code> fulfills
                  this role.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m10.3.">10.3. Description of additional folia or parts of the manuscripts</h3>
               <div class="p">The use of the <code>&lt;msPart&gt;</code> element might be appropriate when there are
                  additional parts in the manuscript that are not to be considered as convoluted, or
                  do not form a part of binding (paste-downs or end-leaves), and which might
                  intersect with the provenance of the manuscript. Such parts should be described as
                  separate element <code>&lt;msPart&gt;</code> with the value of the attribute <code>@type</code>
                  additional:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msPart n="1" type="additional"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;physDesc&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/physDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;scribeDesc&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/scribeDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msContents&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msContents&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;history&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origin&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origDate/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origPlace/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/origin&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/history&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msPart&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">Examples of such usage could include an additional note on a separate leaf, or
                  text from a later scribe.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m10.4.">10.4. Additionally written part(s) of a manuscript</h3>
               <div class="p">A special case could be a separate text written on the same folia as the original
                  manuscript but containing an entire separate literary work. This addition is best
                  described inside a special <code>&lt;msPart&gt;</code> element with its own location, name of
                  the scribe, if available, and, of course, with a description of the content. Very
                  often these texts are unique in the tradition and they deserve a special edition
                  inside the description. In such cases an element <code>&lt;div&gt;</code> with its
                  sub-elements should be provided, as in the following example:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msPart&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>bottom margins<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msContents&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;div xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span> Пишемь азь ереи Петрь, да се (знае) какво врѣме бѣше.
          (Бех) попь на село Мирково и бѣше попь Стоянь, заедно дръжѣхме село
          Мирково … при злочьстиваго цара сультань Мехмеда, да го богь убие и да
          го порази, че той расипа христѣнски вѣре и велики цркви и велики градове
          … Бѣше честита земѣ Загоре, та па се яви байракь от запать, та доде до
          срѣдь демле от Бечь, от Будимь, от Янекь, дори от Злате яблъке. Та се
          проврьвихе турци и прѣзморци, татаре и каталане и хиньдие и миньдие, и
          опашата вѣра, та ги вдигѫ царь Мехметь на воиске и самси трьгнѫ, Кара
          кехая му бе везирь. Та трь… този лѣто изгине войска турска, исбрахе ги
          латинска войска. Едва утече царь Мехметь и Кара кехая назать. И да знае,
          кой чете да види, че беше от Бога, че даде Богь жито скьпо, сирене скьпо,
          а на Загоре рож ходеше гроше. Та беше зло и невола и зими зли. Да не даде
          богь веке такьвись години зли вь лето зр҃.ѕ҃.и҃. (1690). Та пакь излезе
          Еень паша от Прѣзьморе, та доде на Цариградь при цара Мехмеда. Та му даде
          царь Мехметь Софие да дрьжи пашалѫкь. Та отиде Еень паша на войске на
          Будимь, та са би сась аламанци този лето. А той нема що да стори на
          аламанци, ами доде, та сьбра сете войскѫ турска, та са врьне цару Мехмеду
          на Цариградь, та удари цара Мехмеда на Цариградь. Та се стори чудо вовь
          Цариградь, изгинехе турци аване, тефтерьдаре, и капиџие, и бостанџие и
          цара Мехмеда затвори, а то стори брата му царь Сюлимань. Та се стори жито
          този лето берекеть, а Еень паша се връне на Софие. Доде до(й)де на Софие,
          а той расипа аване, каде мине. Та че доде на Софие та се истровиха аване,
          и кадие, и мольлата от страхове Еенови. Та седе на Софие месець, та че
          пусти царь Сулимань улака до него да иде на Бельградь да се бие, а той не
          ще да иде. А царь стори нифрамъ на него да се бие. Та затворихе клисурите
          и друмовете да го не пустеть. Та седехе по месець по дерьвенете турци и
          рая и кадие, та да не утече Еень паша. А той тръгне тогись на Бельградь
          да отиде, а то дадохе аламанци, та превзехе Белиградь и опрехе до Нишь. И
          Еень се запрѣхе на Нишь, а тие отидохе на Босне да прѣвьземать Босне. А
          Еень пусти мойске, та оплени Кипровець и изьгуби и пороби… <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/div&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msContents&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;additional&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;listBibl&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;bibl type="edition"&gt;</span>Дринов 1882<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/bibl&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;bibl type="edition"&gt;</span>Цонев 1910: 447–448<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/bibl&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/listBibl&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/additional&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msPart&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m10.5.">10.5. A complicated example: a palimpsest kept in various repositories</h3>
               <div class="p">One particularly complicated case for description is a Sinai Slavic Miscellany
                  that now is kept in two libraries, where it is divided into 5 parts. The
                  manuscript, written on parchment and paper, has palimpsest parts in Cyrillic,
                  Glagolitic and Greek. The description begins with the heading:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;head&gt;</span>Codex Sinaiticus, 12th c., the end-13 c., and 13 c.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/head&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">In this case we have separate <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code> elements following
                  immediately after the head:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="partial"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Egypt<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;geogName&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;geogFeat&gt;</span>Mount<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/geogFeat&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;name&gt;</span>Sinai<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/name&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/geogName&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Monastery “St. Catherine"<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>Sin 34<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="partial"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Egypt<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Monastery “St. Catherine"<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>Sin 18/N<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="partial"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Russia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Sankt Peterburg<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Russian National Library<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>Gr. 70<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="partial"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Russia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Sankt Peterburg<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Russian National Library<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;collection&gt;</span>Osnovnoe sobranie<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/collection&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>Q.p.I.63<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;altIdentifier type="partial"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;country&gt;</span>Russia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/country&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Sankt Peterburg<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;repository&gt;</span>Russian National Library<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/repository&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;collection&gt;</span>Osnovnoe sobranie<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/collection&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</span>Q.p.I.64<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/altIdentifier&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">This information is followed by physical characteristics, such as the number of
                  leaves, dimensions, and other layout properties that do not belong to any one
                  particular part, followed by a general overview about the manuscript condition.
                  These physical characteristics are followed by a description of each of the seven
                  scribes who wrote the upper layer of the text. Consider the following example:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;scribe n="E"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locusGrp&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>Q.п.I.63, 1r-3r<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>Sin. 34, 63v-71v<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>Sin. 34, 77r-81r<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locusGrp&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;palaeoCharact script="cyrs"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>Uncial<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/palaeoCharact&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;scribeLang&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;summary&gt;</span>Middle Bulgarian with Russian features<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/summary&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;orthography&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;orthNote type="jer" subtype="front"&gt;</span>only <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>ь<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/orthNote&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;orthNote type="jus" subtype="nonConsis"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>ѫ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span> 
             replaced by <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>оу<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span>; 
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>ѧ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span> replaced by <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>a<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span>;<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/orthNote&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;orthNote type="otherLetters"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>ы<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span>; 
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>ѥ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span> and <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;c xml:lang="cu"&gt;</span>ѩ<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/c&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/orthNote&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/orthography&gt;</span>
       …
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/scribeLang&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/scribe&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">Here the place where scribe E wrote is identified and attributed, followed by a
                  short overview of his palaeography and language.</div>
               <div class="p">A description of the content applies to all parts together, and begins with
                  general information about the origins of all of the texts:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msContents&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;filiation type="protograph"&gt;</span>Middle Bulgarian<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/filiation&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;filiation type="antigraph"&gt;</span>Russian<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/filiation&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msContents&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">Since the texts now are in different repositories, their sequence and locations
                  are especially important. Consider the following example:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msItemStruct xml:id="ACD1"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locusGrp&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus n="Sin.18N.1"&gt;</span>Sin. 18/N, 1v–8v<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus n="Gr.70.2"&gt;</span>Gr. 70, 54r-98r (54, 59, 60, 57, 58, 55, 56,
          61–98)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locusGrp&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;title xml:lang="la"&gt;</span>Pandectae<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/title&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;author xml:lang="la"&gt;</span>Nicon monachus<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/author&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msItemStruct&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">The cataloguing information of the common part ends with data about the
                  manuscript’s origin, history and administrative information. Then begins a
                  description of each of the palimpsest’s parts, for example (all examples in this
                  section are from the electronic description made by Anisava Miltenova and Yavor
                  Miltenov):
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msPart type="palimpsest" subtype="Glagolitic" corresp="QpI64"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;locus&gt;</span>ff. 1-8<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/locus&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;physDesc&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;objectDesc&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;layoutDesc&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;layout&gt;</span>one
          column<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/layout&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/layoutDesc&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/objectDesc&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/physDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;scribeDesc&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;scribe&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;palaeoCharact script="glag"&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>Round Glagolica<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/palaeoCharact&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/scribe&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/scribeDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msContents&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>Office menaion or Troparia from Octoechos (1958)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msContents&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;history&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origin&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;origDate&gt;</span>11th c.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/origDate&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/origin&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/history&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msPart&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="m11.">11. Recommended minimum metadata content in manuscript description files for the
               Repertorium</h2>
            <div class="p">The metadata information contained in the <code>&lt;teiHeader&gt;</code> element conforms
               completely to the TEI Guidelines Minimal and recommended headers (Burnard and Bauman
               2007: Chapter 2.6). The only mandatory element is the description of file
                  (<code>&lt;fileDesc&gt;</code>), which, in the framework of Repertorium, should give the
               following information:</div>
            <ul><li>Title of the document</li><li>Author of the document</li><li>Editor and/or other person responsible for the content of the document</li><li>Publisher</li><li>Place of publication</li><li>Date</li><li>Internal Repertorium identifier</li><li>Availability of the document</li><li>Information about the primary source for writing the document</li><li>Documentation of possible document revisions</li></ul>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m11.1.">11.1. The title and creators of the documents</h3>
               <div class="p">This information comes at the beginning of the <code>&lt;fileDesc&gt;</code>:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;teiHeader&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;fileDesc&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;titleStmt&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;title&gt;</span>Codex Suprasliensis: reading menaion for March,
          10th century<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/title&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;author xml:id="MP"&gt;</span>Maya Petrova- Taneva<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/author&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;editor xml:id="AM"&gt;</span>Anisava Miltenova<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/editor&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;respStmt&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;name xml:id="AB"&gt;</span>Andrej Bojadziev<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/name&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;resp&gt;</span>edition of XML code<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/resp&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/respStmt&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/titleStmt&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/fileDesc&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/teiHeader&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">The first part of the TEI file contains the <code>&lt;titleStmt&gt;</code> (i.e., title
                  statement), which unifies information about the document title (<code>&lt;title&gt;</code>)
                  and creators . In this example there are three types of creators: author, editor
                  and the person who edited the XML code. Each of these creators is identified by
                  the value of the <code>@xml:id</code> attribute.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m11.2.">11.2. Information on document publication</h3>
               <div class="p">The second type of information deals with the publication of the document. It
                  includes the name of the publisher, place and date of publishing, internal
                  Repertorium identifier and availability (available, restricted, etc.). A sample of
                  such information could look as follows:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;publicationStmt&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;publisher&gt;</span>e.g., Institute of Literature, BAS<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/publisher&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;pubPlace&gt;</span>e.g., Sofia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/pubPlace&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;date&gt;</span>e.g., 1998<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/date&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;idno type="Repertorium"&gt;</span>RC- MPCodexSuprasliensis<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/idno&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;availability status="free"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span>The intellectual content of this file is copyrighted by the creators
          under the Creative Commons Attribution-No Derivative Works 3.0 under
          legislation in …<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/availability&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/publicationStmt&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">The Repertorium identifier is formed from the abbreviation RC, meaning
                     <code>Repertorium code</code>, followed by an <code>en dash</code>, the first
                  letters of the author’s (i.e., encoder’s) name, and an abbreviation of the
                  repository and shelfmark. When the manuscript has a special name or is divided
                  into several repositories, a unique name is used.</div>
               <div class="p">The content of the works in the Repertorium are published under a Creative Commons
                  license that allows users to share (to copy, distribute and transmit the work)
                  under the condition that they must attribute the work in appropriate way and may
                  not alter, transform, or build upon it (<a href="http://creativecommons.org /licenses/by-nd/3.0/">http://creativecommons.org /licenses/by-nd/3.0/</a> ). This license is valid
                  for the content written by the researchers. For TEI licensing and citation
                  guidelines for software and text materials users may consult the TEI: Licen­sing
                  and Citation part of TEI Guidelines (<a href="http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/access.xml">http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/access.xml</a>). The XML additions and
                  changes to the TEI models are governed by that same policy.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m11.3.">11.3. The source of the document</h3>
               <div class="p">The last part of the <code>&lt;fileDesc&gt;</code> element deals with sources. In the case of
                  a manuscript description that is intended to serve as the sole content of the
                  electronic file, this information may be very brief. A thorough explanation of the
                  sources for the description could then be part of the <code>&lt;recordHist&gt;</code> element
                  in the administrative part of the file (<code>&lt;adminInfo&gt;</code> ). A short example of a
                  bibliographic reference could be:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sourceDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;ref type="edition" target="../bibliography/zbib.xml#ZaimovJ_CapaldoM1982"&gt;</span>
          Заимов, Капалдо 1982<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/ref&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sourceDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">If, however, the description is to be accompanied by an edition of the manuscript
                  text, then the <code>&lt;sourceDesc&gt;</code> should contain all elements of the description,
                  beginning with the <code>&lt;msDesc&gt;</code>. In that case the edited text of the manuscript
                  would constitute the body of the document:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;TEI&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;teiHeader&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sourceDesc&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;msDesc&gt;</span>…<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/msDesc&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sourceDesc&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/teiHeader&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;text&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;body&gt;</span> … <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/body&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/text&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/TEI&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m11.4.">11.4. Non-bibliographic aspects of the document</h3>
               <div class="p">This information forms part of the <code>&lt;profileDesc&gt;</code> element (Burnard and
                  Bauman 2007: profileDesc). Here the following aspects are encoded:</div>
               <ul><li>exact date of the first document edition (day, month and year)</li><li>language usage in the document</li><li>classification of the described text</li></ul>
               <div class="p">The following example illustrates the use of these characteristics:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;profileDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;creation&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;date when="1998-12-19"&gt;</span>19.12.1998<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/date&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;settlement&gt;</span>Sofia<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/settlement&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/creation&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;langUsage&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;language ident="ch"&gt;</span>Old Slavic<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/language&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;language ident="bu"&gt;</span>Bulgarian<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/language&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;language ident="en"&gt;</span>English<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/language&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/langUsage&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;textClass&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;keywords scheme="Repertorium"&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;list&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item&gt;</span>Reading menaion for March<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item&gt;</span>March<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item&gt;</span>Menologion<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item&gt;</span>Vitae<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;item&gt;</span>Homilies<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/item&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/list&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/keywords&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/textClass&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/profileDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">The creation (date and place) information is for internal usage. The form of the
                  date as part of the attribute is given as the sequence <code>yyyy-mm-dd</code>
                  (year-month-day). Most of the files in the Repertorium are in Bulgarian, English
                  and Old Bulgarian (Old Slavic, Old Church Slavonic). Latin is also used widely,
                  especially in some manuscript names, e.g., Codex Zographensis. In this place in
                  the description it is encoded as:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;language ident="la"&gt;</span>Latin<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/language&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">The Repertorium uses its own metadata scheme for metadata, encoded with
                     <code>&lt;keywords scheme="Repertorium"/&gt;</code>. The metadata itself is
                  always represented as a list of keywords.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m11.5.">11.5. Descriptions of possible document changes</h3>
               <div class="p">Changes or revisions are recorded as part of the element <code>&lt;revisionDesc&gt;</code>.
                  Each change is documented separately, starting with the most recent, e.g.:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;revisionDesc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;change who="#AB" when="2010-07-10"&gt;</span>Conversion to new Repertorium scheme.
       Included head element and its content. Small edtorial changes. Rearanged
       revisionDesc: now the last change comes to the first place. <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/change&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;change who="#AB" when="2009-04-17"&gt;</span>Removed constructions
       &amp;lt;author&amp;gt;anonumous&amp;lt;/author&amp;gt;<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/change&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;change who="#AB" when="2009-04-17"&gt;</span>Added copyright statement<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/change&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;change who="#AB" when="2009-04-13"&gt;</span>Added Repertorium Identifier<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/change&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;change who="#AB" when="2009-04-15"&gt;</span>Proofreading<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/change&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/revisionDesc&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
               <div class="p">Here the value of the attribute <code>@who</code> points to one of the content
                  creators identified elsewhere. The date in the attribute is in year-month-day
                  format. This list of revisions is intended to reflect primarily the technical side
                  of the document. The documentation of editorial changes of a manuscript
                  description might more properly be encoded in the <code>&lt;recordHist&gt;</code> as part of
                  the administrative information (<code>&lt;adminInfo&gt;</code>).</div>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="m12.">12. Usage of some elements common with TEI P5 declarations</h2>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m12.1.">12.1. Divisions</h3>
               <div class="p">In the TEI approach there are two ways to structure a given text at a high level:
                  numbered and unnumbered text divisions. The Repertorium uses only the latter
                  approach. In the description of manuscripts in the Repertorium project the element
                     <code>&lt;div&gt;</code> is used only in cases when an unknown or rare text or text variant
                  is discovered and merits inclusion as a preliminary edition.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m12.2.">12.2. Paragraphs</h3>
               <div class="p">Paragraphs (<code>&lt;p&gt;</code>) may appear in various places in the
                  description—essentially anywhere where there is not enough data for a structured
                  description or where such a description is otherwise unnecessary or undesirable. A
                  possible example might be paragraphs in the element <code>&lt;condition&gt;</code>, where
                  different types of damage or loss could be grouped together, as in this example
                  from the description of <cite>Codex Suprasliensis</cite>:
                  <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;condition&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p xml:id="missedparts"&gt;</span>The beginning and the end of Ljubljana part are
       missing. Two leaves have been lost from the middle of the Vita of St Paul
       the Simple, after f. 86v. There are lacunae between ff.78v-79r, 84v-85r.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p xml:id="replacements"&gt;</span>f. 38 (containing part of the Vita of SS Terentius,
       Africanus and Pompius) is bound in the wrong place and should be read after
       f. 88v.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;p xml:id="trimmededges"&gt;</span>The edges of the folia in the Ljubljana part were
       trimmed during the restoration of this part of the MS, with the result that
       the parts that are now in Saint Petersburg and Warsaw are slightly larger
          (<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;dimensions unit="mm" type="folia"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;height&gt;</span>313<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/height&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;width&gt;</span>250<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/width&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/dimensions&gt;</span>)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/p&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/condition&gt;</span>
</pre></div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="m12.3.">12.3. Bibliographies and references</h3>
               <div class="p">Bibliographies provide a choice between one simple bibliographical reference
                  (element <code>&lt;bibl&gt;</code>) and a list of such references (element <code>&lt;listBibl&gt;</code>).
                  Both elements are described in TEI Guidelines (Burnard and Bauman 2007). In the
                  Repertorium framework neither of these should contain a full bibliographical
                  record; Repertorium practice is that these elements contain only pointers to full
                  bibliographic information, which is encoded at the end of a description or, when
                  the description is part of the larger project, in а separate file.</div>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="m13.">13. Conclusion</h2>
            <div class="p">The Repertorium Initiative provides detailed, structured additions to the TEI XML
               manuscript description model. It complements the TEI model in some parts through the
               rearrangement of known elements, the addition of new ones, and the extension of the
               base of specialized attributes, all with an eye toward intra-project consistency and
               support for particular details of the Slavonic philological tradition.</div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="m14.">14. References</h2>
            <ul>
               <li>Altheim, Murray and Shane McCaron (eds.). 2001. XHTMLtm 1.1 – Module-based
                  XHTML. W3C Recommendation 31 May 2001. http://www.w3.org/TR/2001/REC-xhtml11-
                  20010531/ (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Berglund, Anders (ed.). 2006: Extensible Stylesheet Language (XSL) Version 1.1.
                  W3C Recommendation 05 December 2006. http://http://www.w3.org/TR/2006/REC-xsl11-
                  20061205/ (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., Masinter, L. (eds.). 2005: Uniform Resource
                  Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax. RFC 3986, IETF, January 2005.
                  http://www.ietf.org/rfc/ rfc3986.txt/ (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Birnbaum, David J. 2009. An XML user steps into, and escapes from, XPath
                  quicksand. Balisage: The Markup Conference 2009, August 11 - 14, 2009.
                  http://www.balisage.net/Proceedings/vol3/print/Birnbaum01/BalisageVol3-Birnbaum01.html
                  (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Birnbaum, David J. and Anissava L. Miltenova (eds.). 2000. Medieval Slavic
                  Manuscripts and SGML: Problems and Perspectives. Sofia: Marin Drinov Publishing
                  House.</li>
               <li>Birnbaum, David J., Andrej T. Boyadzhiev, Milena Dobreva, Anissava L. Miltenova
                  (eds.). 1995. Computer Processing of Medieval Slavic Manuscripts. Proceedings.
                  First International Conference, 24-28 July 1995, Blagoevgrad, Bulgaria. Sofia:
                  Marin Drinov Publishing House.</li>
               <li>Boag, Scott, Don Chamberlin, Mary F. Fernández, Daniela Florescu, Jonathan
                  Robie, Jérôme Siméon (eds.). 2007. XQuery 1.0: An XML Query Language. W3C
                  Recommendation 23 January 2007. http://www.w3.org/TR/2007/REC-xquery-20070123/
                  (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Bojadžiev, Andrej. 2000. Codicology, Palaeography, and Language in the Computer
                  Description of Medieval Slavic Manuscripts. In A. Miltenova and D. J. Birnbaum
                  (eds.), Medieval Slavic Manuscripts and SGML. Problems and Perspectives. Sofia:
                  Marin Drinov, 2000. 69-90.</li>
               <li>Bojadžiev, Andrej, Anissava Miltenova and Dilyana Radoslavova 2003. A Unified
                  Model for the Description of Medieval Manuscripts? Computational Approaches to the
                  Study of Early and Modern Slavic Languages and Texts. Proceedings of the
                     <i>Electronic Description and Edition of Slavic Sources</i>
                  conference, 24-26 September 2002, Pomorie, Bulgaria. Sofia: Boyan Penev Publishing
                  Center, Institute of Literature. 113-135.</li>
               <li>Boyadzhiev, Andrej. 2009. Constructing Repertorium 3.0. Scripta &amp; e-Scripta
                  7. 13–48.</li>
               <li>Bos, Bert, Håkon Wium Lie, Chris Lilley, Ian Jacobs (eds.). 2008. Cascading
                  Style Sheets, Level 2 CSS2 Specification. W3C Recommendation, 11 April 2008.
                  http://www.w3.org/ TR/2008/REC-CSS2-20080411(15 July 2010).</li>
               <li>Bray, Tim, Dave Hollander, Andrew Laymon, Richard Tobin (eds.). 2006a:
                  Namespaces in XML1.0 (Second edition), W3C Recommendation, 16 August 2006.
                  http://www.w3.org/ TR/xml-names/ (15 July 2010).</li>
               <li>Bray, Tim, Jean Paoli, C. M. Sperberg-McQueen, Eve Maler and François Yergau
                  (eds.). 2008: Extensible Markup Language (XML) Version 1.0 (Fifth edition), W3C
                  Recommendation, 26 November 2008. http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml/
                  (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Burnard, Lou and Syd Bauman (eds.). 2007: TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic
                  Text Encoding and Interchange. http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/
                  (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Burnard, Lou, Syd Bauman and Steven DeRose (eds.) 2001: TEI P4: Guidelines for
                  Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange.
                  http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P4/index.xml (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Burnard, Lou, Richard Gartner and Peter Kidd. 1997. The Cataloguing of Western
                  Medieval Manuscripts in Bodleian Library: a TEI approach with appendix describing
                  a TEI-conformant manuscript description. http://www.users.ac.uk/~lou/wip/MS/
                  (12.10.2010).</li>
               <li>Clark, James (ed.). 1999: XSL Transformations (XSLT) Version 1.0, W3C
                  Recommendation 16 November 1999. http://www.w3.org/TR/1999/REC-xslt-19991116
                  (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Clark, James (ed.). 2002: Relax NG Compact Syntax. OASIS Committee
                  Specification 21 November 2002. http://www.relaxng.org/compact-20021121.html
                  (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Clark, James and Steve DeRose (eds.). 1999. XML Path Language (XPath) Version
                  1.0. W3C Recommendation 16 November 1999.
                  http://www.w3.org/TR/1999/REC-xpath-19991116 (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Clark, James and Murata Makomoto (eds.). 2001. Relax NG Specification. OASIS
                  Committee Specification 3 December 2001.http://www.relaxng.org/spec-20011203.html
                  (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Cleminson, Ralph. 1998. Computer Applications and the Study of Early Cyrillic
                  Printed Books. Palaeobulgarica 22 (2). 104–115.</li>
               <li>Cleminson, Ralph. 2003. A Good Servant but a Bad MASTER: Uses and Abuses of
                  Standards in Manuscript Description. In A. Miltenova, D. J. Birnbaum and S.
                  Slevinsky (eds.), Computational Approaches to the Study of Early and Modern Slavic
                  Languages and Texts. Proceedings of the <i>Electronic Description and
                     Edition of Slavic Sources</i> conference, 24-26 September 2002, Pomorie,
                  Bulgaria. Sofia: Boyan Penev Publishing Center, Institute of Literature.
                  105-111.</li>
               <li>Common Data Hub: ISO 3166 Country Codes: http://www.commondatahub.com/live/
                  geography/country/iso_3166_country_codes (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>DeRose, Steven, Ron Daniel Jr., Eve Maler, and Jonathan Marsh (eds.). 2003.
                  Xpointer xmlns() Scheme. W3C Recommendation 25 March 2003
                  http://www.w3.org/TR/2003/ REC- xptr-xmlns-20030325/ (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>DeRose, Steven, Eve Maler and David Orchard (eds.). 2001. XML Linking Language
                  (XLink) Version 1.0. W3C Recommendation 27 June 2001.
                  http://www.w3.org/TR/2000/REC- xlink-20010627/ (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Dobreva, Milena. 2000. A repertory of the old Bulgarian literature: Problems
                  concerning the design and use of a computer supported model. In A. Miltenova and
                  D. J. Birnbaum (eds.), Medieval Slavic Manuscripts and SGML. Problems and
                  Perspectives. Sofia: Marin Drinov. 91–98.</li>
               <li>Dutschke, C. W., Mirella Ferrari and R. H. Rouse (eds.). 1987. Medieval and
                  Renaissance Manuscripts in the Claremont Libraries. University of California
                  Press.</li>
               <li>Gagova, Nina. 1998. TSM: Тhe element NOТE: Improvement of the encoding
                  possibilities: а philo1ogica1 proposal. In Milena Dobreva (ed.), Text Variety in
                  the Witnesses of Medieval Texts. Sofia: Institute of Mathematics and Informatics.
                  161-164.</li>
               <li>Gagova, Nina. 2000. Study of groups of manuscripts chosen by socio-cultural
                  criteria (Manuscripts belonging to rulers libraries from the fourteenth and
                  fifteenth centuries). In A. Miltenova and D. J. Birnbaum (eds.), Medieval Slavic
                  Manuscripts and SGML. Problems and Perspectives. Sofia: Marin Drinov.
                  131–169.</li>
               <li>Gillisen, L. 1977. Prolégomènes à la codicologie. Recherches sur la
                  construction des cahiers et la mise en page des manuscrits médiévaux. Gand.</li>
               <li>Grosso, Paul, Eve Maler, Jonathan Marsh and Norman Walsh (eds.). 2003a.
                  XPointer Frame- work, W3C Recommendation 25 March 2003.
                  http://www.w3.org/TR/xptr-framework/ (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Grosso, Paul, Eve Maler, Jonathan Marsh and Norman Walsh (eds.). 2003b.
                  XPointer element() Scheme, W3C Recommendation 25 March 2003.
                  http://www.w3.org/TR/xptr-element/ (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>ISO 10646: International Organization for Standardization, “ISO/IEC 10646:2003.
                  Information technology – Universal Multiple-Octet Coded Character Set (UCS)”,
                  2003.</li>
               <li>ISO 15924: International Organization for Standardization, “ISO 15924:2004.
                  Information and documentation -- Codes for the representation of names of
                  scripts”, January 2004.</li>
               <li>ISO 3166-1: International Organization for Standardization, “ISO 3166-1:1997.
                  Codes for the representation of names of countries and their subdivisions -- Part
                  1: Country codes”, 1997.</li>
               <li>ISO 639-1: International Organization for Standardization, “ISO 639-1:2002.
                  Codes for the representation of names of languages -- Part 1: Alpha-2 code”,
                  2002.</li>
               <li>ISO 639-2. International Organization for Standardization, “ISO 639-2:1998.
                  Codes for the representation of names of languages -- Part 2: Alpha-3 code, first
                  edition”, 1998.</li>
               <li>Jones, L. W. 1946a. Pricking Systems in New York Manuscripts. Miscellanea G.
                  Mercati, vol. VI (Studi e Testi, 126). Città del Vaticano. 80–92.</li>
               <li>Jones, L. W. 1946b. Pricking Manuscripts: The Instruments and Their
                  Significance. Speculum 21. 389-403.</li>
               <li>Krushelnitskaya, Ekaterina V. 2003. Description of Medieval Slavic Sources in
                  the Electronic Catalog of the Department of Manuscripts in the National Library of
                  Russia: Goals, Research Problems, and Prospects. In A. Miltenova. D. Birnbaum and
                  S. Slevinski (eds.), Computational Approaches to the Study of Early and Modern
                  Slavic Languages and Texts. Proceedings of the <i>Electronic Description and
                     Edition of Slavic Sources</i> conference, 24-26 September 2002, Pomorie,
                  Bulgaria. Sofia: Boyan Penev Publishing Center, Institute of Literature.
                  157–188.</li>
               <li>Leroy, J. 1976. Les types de réglure des manuscrits grecs. Paris: Institut de
                  recherche et d’histoire des textes (Bibliographie-Colloques-Travaux
                  préparatoires).</li>
               <li>Marsh, Jonathan and Richard Tobin (eds.). 2009. XML Base (Second Edition). W3C
                  Recommendation, 28 January 2009. http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/REC-xmlbase-20090128/
                  (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Miklas, Heinz and Anissava Miltenova (eds.). 2008. Slovo: Towards a Digital
                  Library of South Slavic Manuscripts. Proceedings of the International Conference
                  21-26 February 2008, Sofia, Bulgaria. Sofia: Bulgarian Academy of Sciences,
                  Institute of literature.</li>
               <li>Miltenov, Yavor. 2010. A New Source for Studying the Symeonic Zlatostruy
                  Collection. Scripta &amp; e-Scripta 8-9. 387–404.</li>
               <li>Miltenova, Anissava. 2008. Metadata and Electronic Catalogs of Slavic
                  Manuscripts: A Multilingual Web-based Terminological Resource for Mediaeval Slavic
                  Studies. Scripta &amp; e-Scripta 6. 83–104.</li>
               <li>Miltenova, Anissava, A. Boyadzhiev and St. Velev 1998. Repertorium of Medieval
                  Slavic Literature: Computer and Philological Standards. Palaeobulgarica 22 (2).
                  50-69.</li>
               <li>Miltenova, Anissava and Andrey Boyadzhiev. 2000. An Electronic Repertory of
                  Medieval Slavic Literature and Letters: A Suite of Guidelines. In A. Miltenova and
                  D. J. Birnbaum (eds.), Medieval Slavic Manuscripts and SGML. Problems and
                  Perspectives. Sofia: Marin Drinov. 43-68.</li>
               <li>Miltenova, Anissava, David Birnbaum and Sarah Slevinski (eds.). 2003.
                  Computational Approaches to the Study of Early and Modern Slavic Languages and
                  Texts. Proceedings of the <i>Electronic Description and Edition of Slavic
                     Sources</i> conference, 24-26 September 2002, Pomorie, Bulgaria. Sofia:
                  Boyan Penev Publishing Center, Institute of Literature.</li>
               <li>Moussakova, Elissaveta. 2003. The Element “Decoration” in Electronic Manuscript
                  Catalogs. In A. Miltenova, D. J. Birnbaum and S. Slevinski (eds), Computational
                  Approaches to the Study of Early and Modern Slavic Languages and Texts.
                  Proceedings of the <i>Electronic Description and Edition of Slavic
                     Sources</i> conference, 24-26 September 2002, Pomorie, Bulgaria. Sofia:
                  Boyan Penev Publishing Center, Institute of Literature. 137–156.</li>
               <li>PDF Reference: PDF Reference Sixth Edition. Adobe Portable Document Format 1.7
                  November 2006. Adobe Systems Incorporated. http://www.adobe.com/devnet/acrobat/
                  pdfs/pdf_reference_1-7.pdf/ (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Peterson, David, Shudi (Sandy) Gao, Ashok Malhotra, C. M. Sperberg-McQueen and
                  Henry S Thomson (eds.). 2009: W3C XML Schema Definition Language (XSD) 1.1 Part 2:
                  Datatypes. W3C Working Draft 30 January 2009. http://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/
                  (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Philips, A., Davis, M. (eds) 2006c: BCP 47, which consists of Philips, Davis
                  2006a and Philips Davis 2006b</li>
               <li>Philips, A., Davis, M. (eds). 2006a: Tags for Identifying Languages, BCP 47,
                  RFC 4646, September 2006. http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4646 (12.02.2012)</li>
               <li>Philips, A., Davis, M. (eds). 2006b: Matching of Language Tags, BCP 47, RFC
                  4647, September 2006. http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4647 (12.02.2012)</li>
               <li>Philips, A., M. Davis (eds). 2006c: BCP 47 (RFC 5646), which consists of
                  Philips, Davis 2006a and Philips Davis 2006b. http://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp47
                  (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Radoslavova, Dilyana. 1998. SGML Tagging of Complex Texts in Old Slavic
                  Liturgical Manuscripts. In Milena Dobreva (ed.), Text Variety in the Witnesses of
                  Medieval Texts. Sofia: Institute of Mathematics and Informatics. 164–166.</li>
               <li>Radoslavova, Dilyana. 2000. Problems Concerning the Computer Description and
                  Processing of Slavic Manuscripts of Euchlogical Type with the Help of TSM (A
                  typology of Bulgarian trebnici in the 17th century. Preliminary results). In A.
                  Miltenova and D. J. Birnbaum (eds.), Medieval Slavic Manuscripts and SGML.
                  Problems and Perspectives. Sofia: Marin Drinov. 170-204.</li>
               <li>Szirmai, J. A. 1999. The Archaeology of Medieval Bookbinding. Ashgate.</li>
               <li>Shudi (Sandy) Gao, C. M. Sperberg-McQueen and Henry S. Thompson (eds.). 2012.
                  W3C XML Schema Definition Language (XSD) 1.1 Part 1: Structures. W3C Proposed
                  Recommendation 19 January 2012. http://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-1/
                  (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. and Burnard, Lou (eds.). 1994: TEI P3: Guidelines for
                  Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange.
                  http://www.tei-c.org/Vault/GL/P3/index.htm (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Stojkova, Ana. 1998. Variety and Standardization of Old Slavonic Texts
                  (Problems of Creating a Data Base). In Milena Dobreva (ed.), Text Variety in the
                  Witnesses of Medieval Texts. Sofia: Institute of Mathematics and Informatics.
                  147–153.</li>
               <li>Stojkova, Ana. 2000. Problems of the Composition of Late Medieval
                  Non-Liturgical Miscellanies and the Place of Hagiographic Works in them. In A.
                  Miltenova and D. J. Birnbaum (eds.), Medieval Slavic Manuscripts and SGML.
                  Problems and Perspectives. Sofia: Marin Drinov. 108-130.</li>
               <li>Thomson, Francis. 1982. Chrysostomica Palaeoslavica. A Preliminary Study of the
                  Sources of the Chrysorrhoas (Zlatorstrui) Collection. Cyrillomethodianum 6.
                  1-65.</li>
               <li>Unicode 5.1. The Unicode Standard, Version 5.1, Unicode Consortium. 2008.
                  Addison-Wesley Professional. http://www.unicode.org/ (15 July 2010).</li>
               <li>Walsh, Norman (ed.). 2002. XML Catalogs. OASIS Committee Specification 06
                  August 2001. http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/entity/spec-2001-08-06.html/
                  (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Александров, А. 1893. Физиолог.</li>
               <li>Дринов, Марин. 1882. Български летописен разказ от края на ХVІІ в. Периодично
                  списание 3. 8–12</li>
               <li>Милтенов, Явор. 2011. Славянский перевод слова Иоанна Златоуста De sancto
                  hieromartyre Phoca. Byzantinoslavica 59 (1–2). 311–368.</li>
               <li>Райков, Божидар, Ст. Кожухаров, Х. Миклас и Хр. Кодов. 1994. Каталог на
                  славянските ръкописи в библиотеката на Зографския манастир в Света гора. София:
                  CIBAL.</li>
               <li>Стойкова, Ана. 1994. Физиологът в южнославянските литератури. София:
                  БАН.</li>
               <li>Стойкова, Ана. 2011. Славянският Физиолог. Византийска редакция: Електронно
                  издание на текста и сравнително изследване. http://physiologus.proab.info/
                  (12.02.2012).</li>
               <li>Цонев, Беньо. 1910. Опис на ръкописите и старопечатните книги на Народната
                  библиотека в София. София: Народна библиотека.</li>
            </ul>
         </div>
      
      
         <h1> Appendices</h1>
         <div>
            <h2 id="mAppendixA.">Appendix A. Renamed Repertorium 2.1 Elements and their TEI P5 and Repertorium 3.0
               correspondences</h2>
            <table>
               <tr>
                  <th>Repertorium 2.1</th>
                  <th>TEI P5 and Repertorium 3.0</th>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;antigraph&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;filiation type="antigraph"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;apograph&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;filiation type="apograph"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;articleAuthor&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;author&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;articleContentDesc&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;articleData&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;note&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;articleData type="language"&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;textLang&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;articleName&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;title&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;borders&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;decoNote type="borders"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;catalogNr&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;idno type="catalogue"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;catalogueStmt&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;churchCal&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;date&gt;</code> in the content of <code>&lt;note&gt;</code>, cf.
                     <code>&lt;articleData&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;codicology&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;physDesc&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;compositionQuire&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;formula&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;contentDesc&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;msContents&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;decoration&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;decoDesc&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;dim&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;dimensions&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;headpieces&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;decoNote type="headpieces"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;initials&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;decoNote type="initials"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;ligature&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;c&gt;</code> or <code>&lt;g&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;linefillers&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;decoNote type="linefillers"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;litRedaction&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;filiation type="litRedaction"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;location&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;locus&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;locusGrp&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;locNumber&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;locus n="…"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;manuscriptCreation&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;origin&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;manuscriptDate&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;origDate&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;manuscriptName&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;msName&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;manuscriptPlace&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;origPlace&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;markings&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;catchwords&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;signatures&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;miscObservat&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;condition&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;miniatures&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;decoNote type="miniatures"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;noteAuthor&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;author&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;noteContent&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;summary&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;noteData&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;note&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;noteFormula&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;formula&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;numFolio&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;extent&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;numPage&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;extent&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;pageRange&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;locus&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;locusGrp&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;otherDecoration&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;decoNote&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;position&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;locus&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;protograph&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;filiation type="protograph"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;quireStructure&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;collation&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;repositCity&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;settlement&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;repositCountry&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;country&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;repositSignature&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;idno type="shelfmark"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;repro&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;surrogates&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;source&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;filiation type="source"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;sup&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;c&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;phr&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;w&gt;</code>, or <code>&lt;seg rend="sup"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;tailpieces&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;decoNote type="tailpieces"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;translation&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;filiation type="translation"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;wash&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;decoNote type="wash"&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;watermarkList&gt;</code></td>
                  <td>series of <code>&lt;watermark&gt;</code> elements</td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;writing&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;summary&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
            </table>

         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="mAppendixB.">Appendix B. Renamed Repertorium elements without TEI P5 correspondence</h2>
            <table>
               <tr>
                  <th>Repertorium 2.1</th>
                  <th>Repertorium 3.0</th>
                  <th>TEI P5 possible mapping</th>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;orthogrCharact&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;orthography&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><b>#PCDATA</b> in <code>&lt;textLang&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;letterForm&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;signForm&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><b>#PCDATA</b> as part of <code>&lt;p&gt;</code> in <code>&lt;handNote&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;listScribe&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;scribeDesc&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;handDesc&gt;</code> ?</td>
               </tr>
            </table>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="mAppendixC.">Appendix C. Unique Repertorium elements</h2>
            <table>
               <tr>
                  <th>Repertorium 3.0</th>
                  <th>TEI P5 possible mapping</th>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;bindingNote&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;p&gt;</code> in <code>&lt;binding&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;countermark&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><b>#PCDATA</b> in <code>&lt;support&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;crypto&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><b>#PCDATA</b> in <code>&lt;handNote&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;grammar&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><b>#PCDATA</b> in <code>&lt;textLang&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;gregoryRule&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><b>#PCDATA</b> in <code>&lt;layout&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;lexis&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><b>#PCDATA</b> in <code>&lt;textLang&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;motif&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><b>#PCDATA</b> in <code>&lt;support&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;pagination&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;foliation&gt;</code> ?</td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;palaeoCharact&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;handDesc&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;palaeoNote&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><b>#PCDATA</b> or <code>&lt;c&gt;</code> + explanation in
                     <code>&lt;handNote&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;quire&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><b>#PCDATA</b> in <code>&lt;collation&gt;</code> + formula</td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;ruling&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><b>#PCDATA</b> in <code>&lt;layout&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;sampleText&gt;</code></td>
                  <td>-</td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;scribe&gt;</code></td>
                  <td>-</td>
               </tr>
               <tr>
                  <td><code>&lt;scribeLang&gt;</code></td>
                  <td><code>&lt;textLang&gt;</code> in <code>&lt;msContents&gt;</code></td>
               </tr>
            </table>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="mAppendixD.">Appendix D. Obsolete Repertorium elements</h2>
            <div class="p"><code>&lt;articleContentDesc&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;articleData&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;articleName&gt;</code>,
                  <code>&lt;borders&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;cadels&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;catalogNr&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;catalogueStmt&gt;</code>,
                  <code>&lt;churchCal&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;codicology&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;compositionQuire&gt;</code>,
                  <code>&lt;contentDesc&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;decoration&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;disposition&gt;</code>,
                  <code>&lt;headpieces&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;initials&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;ligature&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;linefillers&gt;</code>,
                  <code>&lt;litRedaction&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;location&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;locNumber&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;man&gt;</code>
               <code>&lt;uscriptContentDesc&gt;</code>,<code>&lt;manuscriptCreation&gt;</code>,<code>&lt;manuscriptDate&gt;</code>,
                  <code>&lt;manuscriptName&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;manuscriptPlace&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;markings&gt;</code>,
                  <code>&lt;miniatures&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;miscObservat&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;neighbour&gt;</code>,
                  <code>&lt;noteAuthor&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;noteContent&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;noteData&gt;</code>,
               <code>&lt;noteFormula&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;numbColumn&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;numberTexts&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;numbLines&gt;</code>,
                  <code>&lt;numFolio&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;numPage&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;otherDecoration&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;overview&gt;</code>,
                  <code>&lt;pageRange&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;paperList&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;parchmentList&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;position&gt;</code>,
                  <code>&lt;protograph&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;quireStructure&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;repositCity&gt;</code>,
                  <code>&lt;repositCountry&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;repositSignature&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;repro&gt;</code>,
                  <code>&lt;scribeList&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;source&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;sup&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;tailpieces&gt;</code>,
                  <code>&lt;translation&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;wash&gt;</code></div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="mAppendixE.">Appendix E. TEI modules used in the Repertorium and their changes</h2>
            <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;moduleRef key="header" except="appInfo application biblFull handNote scriptNote typeNote"/&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;moduleRef key="linking" except="alt altGrp join joinGrp link linkGrp"/&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;moduleRef key="core" except="postBox postCode teiCorpus"/&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;moduleRef key="tei"/&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;moduleRef key="textstructure" except="argument byline closer dateline div1
                   div2 div3 div4 div5 div6 div7 opener postscript salute signed"/&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;!-- optional modules --&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;moduleRef key="analysis"/&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;moduleRef key="certainty"/&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;moduleRef key="figures"/&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;moduleRef key="msdescription" except="handDesc msItem scriptDesc typeDesc"/&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;moduleRef key="namesdates" except="climate terrain"/&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;moduleRef key="transcr" except="handNotes"/&gt;</span>
</pre>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="mAppendixF.">Appendix F. Deleted TEI models</h2>
            <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classSpec ident="model.physDescPart" type="model" mode="delete" module="msdescription"/&gt;</span>
</pre>
            <div class="p">The Repertorium uses a different model for physical description</div>
         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="mAppendixG.">Appendix G. Changed TEI element declarations</h2>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.1.">Appendix G.1. Element <code>&lt;additions&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="additions" module="msdescription" mode="change"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed" mode="add"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.datable" mode="add"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
               <div class="p">Allows inclusion of typology and attributes for formalizing datable additional
                  parts, e.g., <code>@when</code>, <code>@to</code>, <code>@from</code>, etc.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.2.">Appendix G.2. Element <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="altIdentifier" module="msdescription" mode="change"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence&gt;</span>
         <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="msName" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
         <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.placeNamePart" expand="sequenceOptionalRepeatable"/&gt;</span>
         <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="institution" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
         <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="repository" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
         <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="collection" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
         <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="idno" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
         <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="note" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
         <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="altIdentifier" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
   <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
               <div class="p">1.Includes <code>&lt;msName&gt;</code> to allow naming a separate sections or parts of the
                  manuscript; 2. Makes <code>&lt;altIdentifier&gt;</code> a nested element, thus allowing
                  designation of collections and shelfmarks inside other collections, or inclusion
                  of alternative identifiers (e.g., former) for archives with composite
                  structure.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.3.">Appendix G.3. Element <code>&lt;binding&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="binding" module="msdescription" mode="change"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded"&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.pLike"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="bindingNote"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="condition"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="decoNote"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
               <div class="p">Includes element <code>&lt;bindingNote&gt;</code> with specialized features not necessarily
                  related to decorative parts of the binding.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.4.">Appendix G.4. Element collation</h3>
               <div class="p">Instead of unstructured elements on paragraph level provides several more
                  specialized sections, such as <code>&lt;quire&gt;</code> for description of each quire,
                     <code>&lt;gregoryRule&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;ruling&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;pricking&gt;</code>.</div>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="collation" module="msdescription" mode="change"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="1"&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;macroRef key="macro.specialPara"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="1"&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="summary" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="quire" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="signatures" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="catchwords" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="gregoryRule" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="ruling" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="pricking" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.5.">Appendix G.5. Element <code>&lt;history&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="history" module="msdescription" mode="change"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.pLike" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="summary" minOccurs="0"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="origin" minOccurs="0"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="accMat" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="provenance" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="acquisition" minOccurs="0"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
               <div class="p">Includes element <code>&lt;accMat&gt;</code> in this place of the schema and removes it from
                  the <code>&lt;physDesc&gt;</code> element. <code>&lt;accMat&gt;</code> (accompanying material) as
                  described in the TEI P5 Guidelines is related with the manuscript history after
                  its writing, unlike the element <code>&lt;additions&gt;</code>.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.6.">Appendix G.6. Element <code>&lt;layout&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="layout" module="msdescription" mode="change"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.measurement" mode="add"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
               <div class="p">Adds an attribute <code>@class</code>
                  <code>measurement</code>. This allows the usage of attributes <code>@unit</code>,
                     <code>@quantity</code> and <code>@commodity</code>.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.7.">Appendix G.7. Element <code>&lt;material&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="material" module="msdescription" mode="change"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global.linking"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global.analytic"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global.facs"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global.change"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.canonical"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;attList&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;attDef ident="usage"&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>describes the usage of the material<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;datatype&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;dataRef key="teidata.word"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/datatype&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/attDef&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/attList&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
               <div class="p">Adds attribute <code>@usage</code> to allow a short characterization of material.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.8.">Appendix G.8. Element <code>&lt;msContents&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="msContents" module="msdescription" mode="change"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.pLike" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="summary" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="titlePage" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="title" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="author" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="respStmt" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.noteLike" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="filiation" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="textLang" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="decoNote" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="sampleText" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="div" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="msItemStruct" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;attList&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;attDef ident="type" usage="opt"&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>describes the type of the text<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;datatype&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;dataRef key="teidata.enumerated"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/datatype&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;valList type="closed"&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;valItem ident="original"&gt;</span>
                    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>the text is original<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/valItem&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;valItem ident="compilation"&gt;</span>
                    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>the text is compiled from various sources<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/valItem&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;valItem ident="translation"&gt;</span>
                    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>the text is translated<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/valItem&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/valList&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/attDef&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/attList&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
               <div class="p">1. Changes the order of elements in some places to reflect the tradition in
                  describing Slavonic manuscripts, e.g., <code>&lt;title&gt;</code> comes before
                  <code>&lt;author&gt;</code>; 2. Includes <code>&lt;respStmt&gt;</code> for situations where these are need
                  for clarification; 3. Includes <code>&lt;sampleText&gt;</code> to distinguish original text
                  from the description; 4. Includes <code>&lt;div&gt;</code> element for the edition of rare or
                  unknown texts; 5. Provides two more attributes (<code>@type</code> and
                     <code>@style</code>) for compatibility with the old Repertorium schema.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.9.">Appendix G.9. Element <code>&lt;msDesc&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="msDesc" module="msdescription" mode="change"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.headLike" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="msIdentifier" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.pLike" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="physDesc" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="scribeDesc" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="msContents" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="history" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="additional" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="msPart" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
               <div class="p">Includes one more level of description for palaeographical and language features
                     (<code>&lt;scribeDesc&gt;</code>). Moves <code>model.headLike</code> to the first position
                  to serve as a heading of the description.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.10.">Appendix G.10. Element <code>&lt;msIdentifier&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="msIdentifier" module="msdescription" mode="change"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="msName" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.pLike" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.placeNamePart" expand="sequenceOptionalRepeatable"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="institution" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="repository" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="collection" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="idno" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="note" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="altIdentifier" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
               <div class="p">1. Moving the element <code>&lt;msName&gt;</code> to the first place in the content; 2. Adding
                     <code>&lt;note&gt;</code> to allow more specific information to appear here, e.g.,
                  bibliographic references.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.11.">Appendix G.11. Element <code>&lt;msItemStruct&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="msItemStruct" module="msdescription" mode="change"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="locus" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="locusGrp" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.pLike" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="title" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="author" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="date" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="respStmt" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.noteLike" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="filiation" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="textLang" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="decoNote" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="colophon" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"&gt;</span>
                   <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="sampleText" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                   <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="div" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="msItemStruct" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="listBibl" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="bibl" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;attList&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;attDef ident="type"&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>describes the type of the text<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;datatype&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;dataRef key="teidata.enumerated"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/datatype&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;valList type="closed"&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;valItem ident="original"&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>the text is original<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/valItem&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;valItem ident="compilation"&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>the text is compiled from variuos sources<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/valItem&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;valItem ident="translation"&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>the text is translated<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/valItem&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/valList&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/attDef&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/attList&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
               <div class="p">1. The same changes as for the element <code>&lt;msContents&gt;</code>. 2. Adds the element
                     <code>&lt;locusGrp&gt;</code>.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.12.">Appendix G.12. Element <code>&lt;msPart&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="msPart" module="msdescription" mode="change"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed" mode="add"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="altIdentifier"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="msIdentifier"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="locus"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="locusGrp"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.headLike" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="1"&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.pLike" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="physDesc" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="scribeDesc" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="msContents" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="history" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="additional" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="msPart" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
             <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
               <div class="p">1. Reflects the same changes as <code>&lt;msDesc&gt;</code> element; 2. Adds the
                     <code>&lt;locus&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;locusGrp&gt;</code> elements for parts of the manuscript that
                  are palimpsests or convolutes; 3. Adds the special attribute <code>@type</code>.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.13.">Appendix G.13. Element <code>&lt;musicNotation&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="musicNotation" module="msdescription" mode="change"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="replace"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed" mode="add"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
               <div class="p">Adds attributes <code>@type</code> and <code>@subtype</code> to allow typologization of
                  the notation.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.14.">Appendix G.14. Element <code>&lt;physDesc&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="physDesc" mode="change" module="msdescription"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.pLike" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="summary" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="objectDesc" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="ink" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="decoDesc" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="bindingDesc" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="sealDesc" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="additions" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
               <div class="p">1. Element <code>&lt;accMat&gt;</code> is moved to <code>&lt;history&gt;</code>; 2. Elements for the
                  description of palaeography are removed and a new model in <code>&lt;scribeDesc&gt;</code> has
                  being used. 3. The element <code>&lt;ink&gt;</code> is added.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.15.">Appendix G.15. Element <code>&lt;supportDesc&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="supportDesc" module="msdescription" mode="change"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.pLike" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="support" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="extent" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="foliation" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="pagination" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="collation" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="condition" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
               <div class="p">The element <code>&lt;pagination&gt;</code> is added.</div>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixG.16.">Appendix G.16. Element <code>&lt;watermark&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="watermark" module="msdescription" mode="change"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global.linking"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global.analytic"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global.facs"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global.change"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.canonical"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded"&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;textNode/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.phrase"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="motif"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="countermark"/&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;attList&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;attDef ident="tracing"&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Describes the methods of recording of some watermark. Methods
                include: tracing, rubbing, etc.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;datatype&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;dataRef key="teidata.word"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/datatype&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/attDef&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/attList&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
               <div class="p">1. Adds attribute class <code>canonical</code> with to allow usage of
                     <code>@key</code> and <code>@ref</code>. 2. Adds new attribute <code>@tracing</code> to
                  characterize the way the watermark has been recorded; 3. Adds elements
                     <code>&lt;countermark&gt;</code> and <code>&lt;motif&gt;</code>.</div>
            </div>

         </div>
         <div>
            <h2 id="mAppendixH.">Appendix H. New elements</h2>
            <div class="p">The Repertorium Initiative model introduces the following new elements in the TEI
               schema.</div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.1.">Appendix H.1. Element <code>&lt;bindingNote&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="bindingNote" module="msdescription" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>allows structured description of binding characteristics in addition
        to decoration and condition<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global" mode="add"/&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed" mode="add"/&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.damaged" mode="add"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded"&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;textNode/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;macroRef key="model.phrase"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="decoNote"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="condition"/&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.2.">Appendix H.2. Element <code>&lt;countermark&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="countermark" module="msdescription" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>contains information about a second, subsidiary watermark<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;textNode/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.phrase"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="motif"/&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.3.">Appendix H.3. Element <code>&lt;crypto&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="crypto" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Provides opportunity to describe the cryptographical system(s) 
       in the MS<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;macroRef key="macro.paraContent"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.4.">Appendix H.4. Element <code>&lt;grammar&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="grammar" module="msdescription" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Describes grammatical features of the scribe’s language<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="replace"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;macroRef key="macro.paraContent"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.5.">Appendix H.5. Element <code>&lt;gregoryRule&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="gregoryRule" module="msdescription" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Description of order of parchment’s leaves in the quires in terms of
       hair- or flesh-side arrangement.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;macroRef key="macro.phraseSeq"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.6.">Appendix H.6. Element <code>&lt;ink&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="ink" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Description of ink(s)<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.measurement"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;macroRef key="macro.phraseSeq"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>

            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.7.">Appendix H.7. Element <code>&lt;lexis&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="lexis" module="msdescription" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Description lexical features.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="replace"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;macroRef key="macro.specialPara"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.8.">Appendix H.8. Element <code>&lt;motif&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="motif" module="msdescription" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Description of water- or countermark motif.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;textNode/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.phrase"/&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="motif"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.9.">Appendix H.9. Element <code>&lt;orthNote&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="orthNote" module="msdescription" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Description of individual rules for letters or other signs usage in the
       manuscript.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="replace"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.naming"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.scoping"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;macroRef key="macro.specialPara"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.10.">Appendix H.10. Element <code>&lt;pagination&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="pagination" module="msdescription" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Describes pagination in some manuscript as opposite to the description of
       foliation. Pagination is used in later or Early Modern manuscripts.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.scoping"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;macroRef key="macro.specialPara"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.11.">Appendix H.11. Element <code>&lt;palaeoCharact&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre> <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="palaeoCharact" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
     <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Palaeograpical characteristics<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
     <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed"/&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.handfeatures"/&gt;</span>
     <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
     &lt;!--
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;rng:choice&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;rng:oneOrMore&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;rng:ref name="model.pLike" /&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/rng:oneOrMore&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;rng:group&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;rng:optional&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;rng:ref name="summary" /&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/rng:optional&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;rng:zeroOrMore&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;rng:ref name="palaeoNote" /&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/rng:zeroOrMore&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;rng:optional&gt;</span>
          <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;rng:ref name="musicNotation" /&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/rng:optional&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;rng:optional&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;rng:ref name="crypto" /&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/rng:optional&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/rng:group&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/rng:choice&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;attList&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;attDef ident="script" usage="opt"&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;datatype&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;rng:text /&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/datatype&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/attDef&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/attList&gt;</span>
                        --&gt;
  <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.12.">Appendix H.12. Element <code>&lt;palaeoNote&gt;</code></h3>
               
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="palaeoNote" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Palaeographical description of some letter or sign<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.handFeatures"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;macroRef key="macro.phraseSeq"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.13.">Appendix H.13. Element <code>&lt;pricking&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="pricking" module="msdescription" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Description of pricking appearance and techniques applied<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;macroRef key="macro.phraseSeq"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.14.">Appendix H.14. Element <code>&lt;ruling&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="ruling" module="msdescription" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Ruling types and techniques go here.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;macroRef key="macro.phraseSeq"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.15.">Appendix H.15. Element <code>&lt;quire&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="quire" module="msdescription" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Description of a separate quire<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.pLike" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="summary" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="locus" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="locusGrp" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="extent" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="formula" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="signatures" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="catchwords" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="gregoryRule" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="ruling" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="pricking" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.16.">Appendix H.16. Element <code>&lt;ruling&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="ruling" module="msdescription" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Ruling types and techniques go here.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;macroRef key="macro.phraseSeq"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.17.">Appendix H.17. Element <code>&lt;sampleText&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="sampleText" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Text sample including manuscript heading, incipit and/or explicit of the
       original text<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.divLike"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.declaring"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="head"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="rubric"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="incipit"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.pLike"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="div"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="explicit" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="finalRubric" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.18.">Appendix H.18. Element <code>&lt;scribe&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="scribe" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Description of palaeography, orthography and language of particular
       scribe<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="locus"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="locusGrp"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.nameLike.agent" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="scriptDesc" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="scribeLang" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="bibl" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="note" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="respStmt" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.19.">Appendix H.19. Element <code>&lt;scribeDesc&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="scribeDesc" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>Repertorium model description of various scribes: palaeography,
       orthography and language.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.pLike" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="summary" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="scribe" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
            <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
        <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
            <div>
               <h3 id="mAppendixH.20.">Appendix H.20. Element <code>&lt;scribeLang&gt;</code></h3>
               <pre><span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementSpec ident="scribeLang" 
  ns="http://www.ilit.bas.bg/repertorium/ns/3.0" prefix="re" mode="add"&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;desc&gt;</span>The language of particular scribe.<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/desc&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classes mode="change"&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.global"/&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;memberOf key="att.typed"/&gt;</span>
    <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/classes&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;content&gt;</span>
           <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;alternate&gt;</span>
               <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;classRef key="model.pLike" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/&gt;</span>
               <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;sequence&gt;</span>
                   <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="summary" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                   <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="orthography" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                   <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="grammar" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
                   <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;elementRef key="lexis" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="1"/&gt;</span>
               <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/sequence&gt;</span>
           <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/alternate&gt;</span>
       <span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/content&gt;</span>
<span class="markup-highlight">&lt;/elementSpec&gt;</span>
</pre>
            </div>
         </div>
      
   </main></body></html>